<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Acknowledgements</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="acknowledgements" epub:type="acknowledgements">
			<p>This is an attempt to evaluate architecture in America in terms of our civilization. I have not sought to criticize particular buildings or tendencies: I have tried, rather, by approaching our modern problems from their historic side, to criticize the forces that from one age to another have conditioned our architecture, and altered its forms. Lest my purpose be misunderstood, I have left out illustrations; for a building is not merely a sight; it is an experience: and one who knows architecture only by photographs does not know it at all. If the omission of pictures lead the reader occasionally to break away from the orbit of his daily walks, and examine our development in cities and buildings for himself, it will be sufficiently justified.</p>
			<p>This book would not have been put together but for the persistent encouragement and kindly interest of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Albert Jay Nock: and it was in The Freeman that the first five chapters, in somewhat briefer form, appeared. My hearty thanks are likewise due to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Charles Harris Whitaker, whose private help and whose admirable public work as editor of the Journal of the American Institute of Architects have both laid me under a heavy obligation. My intellectual debt to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Victor Branford and Patrick Geddes will be apparent to those who have followed their work. In the concluding chapters I have been stimulated and guided in many places by unpublished reports and memoranda written by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Clarence Stein, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Benton Mackaye, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Henry Wright. My friendly thanks are also due to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> James Henderson, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Geroid Tanquary Robinson, and Miss Sophia Wittenberg.</p>
			<p>Besides the essays in The Freeman, some of the material in Sticks and Stones has appeared in the Journal of the American Institute of Architects (Chapter Six), in The New Republic, and in The American Mercury. I thank the editors for their permission to draw on these articles.</p>
			<p class="ir2 pminus1">
				<span class="smcap">Lewis Mumford.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
