<p><em>Architecture, properly understood, is
civilization itself.</em><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 15em;">—<span class="smcap">W. R. Lethaby</span></span></p>
<p><em>What is civilization? It is the humanization
of man in society.</em><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 15em;">—<span class="smcap">Matthew Arnold.</span></span></p>
</div></div></div>
<div class="chapter">
<h2 class="nobreak">ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</h2>
</div>
<p>This is an attempt to evaluate architecture in America
in terms of our civilization. I have not sought to criticize
particular buildings or tendencies: I have tried,
rather, by approaching our modern problems from their
historic side, to criticize the forces that from one age to
another have conditioned our architecture, and altered
its forms. Lest my purpose be misunderstood, I have
left out illustrations; for a building is not merely a sight;
it is an experience: and one who knows architecture
only by photographs does not know it at all. If the
omission of pictures lead the reader occasionally to
break away from the orbit of his daily walks, and examine
our development in cities and buildings for himself,
it will be sufficiently justified.</p>
<p>This book would not have been put together but for
the persistent encouragement and kindly interest of
Mr. Albert Jay Nock: and it was in The Freeman that
the first five chapters, in somewhat briefer form, appeared.
My hearty thanks are likewise due to Mr.
Charles Harris Whitaker, whose private help and whose
admirable public work as editor of the Journal of the
American Institute of Architects have both laid me
under a heavy obligation. My intellectual debt to
Messrs. Victor Branford and Patrick Geddes will be
apparent to those who have followed their work. In the
concluding chapters I have been stimulated and guided
in many places by unpublished reports and memoranda
written by Mr. Clarence Stein, Mr. Benton Mackaye,
and Mr. Henry Wright. My friendly thanks are also
due to Mr. James Henderson, Mr. Geroid Tanquary
Robinson, and Miss Sophia Wittenberg.</p>
<p>Besides the essays in The Freeman, some of the
material in Sticks and Stones has appeared in the
Journal of the American Institute of Architects (Chapter
Six), in The New Republic, and in The American
Mercury. I thank the editors for their permission to
draw on these articles.</p>
<p class="ir2 pminus1"><span class="smcap">Lewis Mumford.</span></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[13]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_ONE">CHAPTER ONE<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">THE MEDIEVAL TRADITION</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>For a hundred years or so after its settlement,
there lived and flourished in America a type of community
which was rapidly disappearing in Europe.
This community was embodied in villages and towns
whose mummified remains even today have a rooted
dignity that the most gigantic metropolises do not
often possess. If we would understand the architecture
of America in a period when good building was
almost universal, we must understand something of
the kind of life that this community fostered.</p>
<p>The capital example of the medieval tradition lies
in the New England village.</p>
<p>There are two or three things that stand in the
way of our seeing the life of a New England village;
and one of them is the myth of the pioneer, the conception
of the first settlers as a free band of
“Americans” throwing off the bedraggled garments
of Europe and starting life afresh in the wilderness.
So far from giving birth to a new life, the settlement<span class="pagenum">[14]</span>
of the northern American seaboard prolonged for a
little while the social habits and economic institutions
which were fast crumbling away in Europe, particularly
in England. In the villages of the New World
there flickered up the last dying embers of the medieval
order.</p>
<p>Whereas in England the common lands were being
confiscated for the benefit of an aristocracy, and the
arable turned into sheep-runs for the profit of the
great proprietors, in New England the common lands
were re-established with the founding of a new settlement.
In England the depauperate peasants and
yeomen were driven into the large towns to become
the casual workers, menials, and soldiers; in New
England, on the other hand, it was at first only with
threats of punishment and conscription that the
town workers were kept from going out into the countryside
to seek a more independent living from the
soil. Just as the archaic speech of the Elizabethans
has lingered in the Kentucky Mountains, so the
Middle Ages at their best lingered along the coast
of Appalachia; and in the organization of our New
England villages one sees a greater resemblance to
the medieval Utopia of Sir Thomas More than to
the classic republic in the style of Montesquieu,<span class="pagenum">[15]</span>
which was actually founded in the eighteenth century.</p>
<p>The colonists who sought to establish permanent
communities—as distinct from those who erected only
trading posts—were not a little like those whom
the cities of Greece used to plant about the Mediterranean
and the Black Sea littoral. Like the founders
of the “Ancient City,” the Puritans first concerned
themselves to erect an altar, or rather, to lay the
foundations for an edifice which denied the religious
value of altars. In the crudest of “smoaky wigwams,”
an early observer notes, the Puritans remember to
“sing psalms, pray, and praise their God”; and
although we of today may regard their religion as
harsh and nay-saying, we cannot forget that it was
a central point of their existence and not an afterthought
piled as it were on material prosperity for
the sake of a good appearance. Material goods
formed the basis, but not the end, of their life.</p>
<p>The meeting-house determined the character and
limits of the community. As Weeden says in his
excellent Economic and Social History of New England,
the settlers “laid out the village in the best
order to attain two objects: first, the tillage and
culture of the soil; second, the maintenance of a<span class="pagenum">[16]</span>
‘civil and religious society.’” Around the meeting-house
the rest of the community crystallized in a
definite pattern, tight and homogeneous.</p>
<p>The early provincial village bears another resemblance
to the early Greek city: it does not continue
to grow at such a pace that it either becomes overcrowded
within or spills beyond its limits into dejected
suburbs; still less does it seek what we ironically
call greatness by increasing the number of its
inhabitants. When the corporation has a sufficient
number of members, that is to say, when the land is
fairly occupied, and when the addition of more land
would unduly increase the hardship of working it
from the town, or would spread out the farmers, and
make it difficult for them to attend to their religious
and civil duties, the original settlement throws out
a new shoot. So Charlestown threw off Woburn;
so Dedham colonized Medfield; so Lynn founded
Nahant.</p>
<p>The Puritans knew and applied a principle that
Plato had long ago pointed out in The Republic,
namely, that an intelligent and socialized community
will continue to grow only as long as it can remain
a unit and keep up its common institutions. Beyond
that point growth must cease, or the community will<span class="pagenum">[17]</span>
disintegrate and cease to be an organic thing.
Economically, this method of community-development
kept land values at a properly low level, and
prevented the engrossing of land for the sake of a
speculative rise. The advantage of the Puritan
method of settlement comes out plainly when one
contrasts it with the trader’s paradise of Manhattan;
for by the middle of the seventeenth century
all the land on Manhattan Island was privately
owned, although only a small part of it was cultivated,
and so eagerly had the teeth of monopoly
bitten into this fine morsel that there was already a
housing-shortage.</p>
<p>One more point of resemblance: all the inhabitants
of an early New England village were co-partners
in a corporation; they admitted into the community
only as many members as they could assimilate.
This co-partnership was based upon a common
sense as to the purpose of the community, and upon
a roughly equal division of the land into individual
plots taken in freehold, and a share of the common
fields, of which there might be half a dozen or
more.</p>
<p>There are various local differences in the apportionment
of the land. In many cases, the minister<span class="pagenum">[18]</span>
and deacons have a larger share than the rest of the
community; but in Charlestown, for example, the
poorest had six or seven acres of meadow and twenty-five
or thereabouts of upland; and this would
hold pretty well throughout the settlements. Not
merely is membership in the community guarded: the
right of occupying and transferring the land is also
restricted, and again and again, in the face of the
General Assembly, the little villages make provisions
to keep the land from changing hands without the
consent of the corporation; “it being our real intent,”
as the burghers of Watertown put it, to “sitt
down there close togither.”</p>
<p>These regulations have a positive side as well;
for in some cases the towns helped the poorer members
of the corporation to build houses, and as
a new member was voted into the community, lots
were assigned immediately, without further ado. A
friend of mine has called this system “Yankee
communism,” and I cheerfully bring the institution
to the attention of those who do not realize upon
what subversive principles Americanism, historically,
rests.</p>
<p>What is true of the seventeenth century in New
England holds good for the eighteenth century in the<span class="pagenum">[19]</span>
Moravian settlements of Pennsylvania; and it is
doubtless true for many another obscure colony;
for the same spirit lingered, with a parallel result in
architecture and industry, in the utopian communities
of the nineteenth century. It is pretty plain
that this type of pioneering, this definite search for
the good life, was conducted on an altogether different
level from the ruthless exploitation of the individual
muckers and scavengers who hit the trail west
of the Alleghanies. Such renewals of the earlier
European culture as the Bach Festival at Bethlehem
give us a notion of the cultural values which the medieval
community carried over from the Old World
to the New. There is some of this spirit left even in
the architecture of the Shaker community at Mount
Lebanon, New York, which was built as late as the
nineteenth century.</p>
<p>In contrast to the New England village-community
was the trading post. Of this nature were the
little towns in the New Netherlands which were
planted there by the Dutch West India Company:
the settlers were for the most part either harassed
individuals who were lured to the New World by
the prospects of a good living, or people of established
rank who were tempted to leave the walks of<span class="pagenum">[20]</span>
commerce for the dignities and affluences that were
attached to the feudal tenure of the large estates
that lined the Hudson.</p>
<p>The germs of town life came over with these
people, and sheer necessity turned part of their
energies to agriculture, but they did not develop the
close village-community we find in New England;
and though New Amsterdam was a replica of the Old
World port, with its gabled brick houses, and its well-banked
canals and fine gardens, it left no decided
pattern on the American scene. It is only the country
architecture of the Dutch which survives as
either a relic or a memory. These trading posts
like Manhattan and Fort Orange were, as Messrs.
Petersen and Edwards have shown in their study
of New York as an Eighteenth Century Municipality,
medieval in their economy: numerous guild and
civic regulations which provided for honest weight
and measure and workmanship continued in force
within the town. In their external dealings, on the
other hand, the practice of the traders was sharp,
and every man was for himself. Beginning its life
by bargaining in necessities, the trading post ends
by making a necessity of bargaining; and it was the
impetus from its original commercial habits which<span class="pagenum">[21]</span>
determined the characteristics of the abortive city
plan that was laid down for Manhattan Island in
1811. Rich as the Dutch precedent is in individual
farmhouses, it brings us no pattern, such as we
find in New England, for the community as a
whole.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>Since we are accustomed to look upon the village
as a quaint primitive relic of a bygone age, we
do not readily see that its form was dictated by social
and economic conditions. Where the village had to
defend itself against Indians, it was necessary to lay
it out completely, so that it might be surrounded by
a stockade, and so that the meeting-house might be
such a rallying center as the bell-tower or the castle
was in Europe, or as the high temple site was in
classic times. But in the eighteenth century the
Indian figured less in the scheme of colonial life,
and along the seacoast and river—as at Wells Beach
in Maine or Litchfield in Connecticut—the village
became a long strip upon a highroad, and the
arable land stretched in narrow plots from the house
to the water, so that the farmer might better
protect his crops and his livestock from the fox,<span class="pagenum">[22]</span>
the wolf, the woodchuck, the hawk, the skunk, and
the deer.</p>
<p>I emphasize these points of structure because of
the silly notion superficial observers sometimes carry
away from the villages of Europe or New England;
namely, that their irregularity is altogether capricious
and uneconomical, associated only with the
vagaries of the straying cow. It would be more
correct to say that the precise reverse was true.
The inequality in size and shape of plots shows always
that attention was paid to the function the
land was to perform, rather than to the mere possession
of property. Thus, there was a difference
in size between home lots, which were always seated
in the village, and purely agricultural tracts of land,
which were usually on the outskirts; and in Dedham,
for example, married men had home lots of twelve
acres, while bachelors received only eight. Another
reason for the compactness of the village was a
decree of the General Court in Massachusetts, in
1635, that no dwelling should be placed more than
half a mile from the meeting-house in any new
plantation. Even irregularities in the layout and
placement of houses, which cannot be referred to
such obvious points as these, very often derive<span class="pagenum">[23]</span>
from an attempt to break the path of the wind, to
get a good exposure in summer, or to profit by a
view.</p>
<p>All this was genuine community planning. It did
not go by this name, perhaps, but it achieved the
result.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>We have learned in recent years to appreciate the
felicities of eighteenth-century colonial architecture,
and even the earlier seventeenth-century style is now
coming into its own, in the sense that it is being
imitated by architects who have an eye for picturesque
effects; but we lose our perspective altogether
if we think that the charm of an old New England
house can be recaptured by designing overhanging
second stories or panelled interiors. The just design,
the careful execution, the fine style that brings
all the houses into harmony no matter how diverse
the purposes they served—for the farmhouse shares
its characteristics with the mill, and the mill with
the meeting-house—was the outcome of a common
spirit, nourished by men who had divided the land
fairly and who shared adversity and good fortune
together. When the frame of the house is to be<span class="pagenum">[24]</span>
raised, a man’s neighbors will lend him a hand; if the
harvest is in danger, every man goes out into the
fields, even if his own crop is not at stake; if a whale
founders on the beach, even the smallest boy bears
a hand, and gets a share of the reward. All these
practices were not without their subtle effect upon
craftsmanship.</p>
<p>Schooled in the traditions of his guild, the medieval
carpenter pours his all into the work. Since sale
does not enter into the bargain, it is both to his
patron’s advantage to give him the best materials,
and to his own advantage to make the most of them.
If at first, in the haste of settlement, the colonists
are content with makeshifts, they are nevertheless
done in the traditional fashion—not the log cabins
of later days, but, more probably, wattle and daub
huts like those of the charcoal burners in the English
forests. In some points, the prevailing English tradition
does not fit the raw climate of the north, and
presently the half-timbered houses of some of the
earlier settlers would be covered by clapboards for
greater warmth, as in the eighteenth century their
interiors were lined with panelled pine or oak, instead
of the rough plaster. No matter what the
material or mode, the carpenter works not simply<span class="pagenum">[25]</span>
for hire, but for dear life’s sake, and as a baker’s
dozen numbers thirteen, so a piece of handicraft
contains not merely the workmanship itself, but a
bit of the worker’s soul, for good measure. The
new invention of the gambrel roof, which gave additional
room to the second story without raising
the roof-tree, is a product of this system; and
the variation in its length and pitch in New England,
New Jersey, and New York is a witness to
the freedom of design that prevailed throughout the
work.</p>
<p>These seventeenth-century houses, built at first
with one or two rooms, and then as luxury increased
and family needs multiplied with as many as four,
would doubtless seem unspeakably crude and mean
to the resident of Floral Heights; indeed, if our
present requirements for housing were so simple it
would not be quite so difficult to meet our perpetual
shortage. As a matter of fact, however, these early
provincial houses were well up to the standards for
a similar homestead in England; and in some ways
were a distinct advance. Just as all the separate
courses on a restaurant menu were a few hundred
years ago cooked in the same pot, so the different
subdivisions of the modern house were originally<span class="pagenum">[26]</span>
combined into a single room, which was not merely
kitchen, workroom, and living quarters, but which
also, at least in winter, served as a stable for the
more delicate members of the barnyard. By the time
America was settled the division into rooms had
just commenced among the better sort of farmer:
the barn had split off from the rest of the house,
and the bedchamber was becoming a separate apartment.
As the seventeenth century lengthened, this
division of functions became more familiar in the
provincial house.</p>
<p>Let us take a brief look at one of these seventeenth-century
buildings; let us say, the John Ward house
in Salem which still survives as a relic. As one approaches
the village on some November day, when
the leaves are no longer on the trees to obscure the
vista, one feels the dynamic quality of medieval
architecture—a quality altogether different from
the prudent regularities of the later Georgian mode.
It is not merely a matter of painted gables, leaded,
diamond-paned windows, overhanging second stories,
much as these would perhaps remind us of a medieval
European town. What would attract one is the
feeling, not of formal abstract design, but of growth:
the house has developed as the family within it has<span class="pagenum">[27]</span>
prospered, and brought forth children; as sons and
daughters have married, as children have become
more numerous, there have been additions: by a
lean-to at one end the kitchen has achieved a separate
existence, for instance; and these unpainted, weathered
oaken masses pile up with a cumulative richness
of effect.</p>
<p>Every step that brings one nearer to the house
alters the relation of the planes formed by the gable
ends; and so one must have got the same effect in
these old village streets as one gets today when one
skirts around, let us say, Notre Dame in Paris, now
overwhelmed by the towers at the front, and now
seeing them reduced to nothing by the tall spire in
the rear. So the building seems in motion, as well
as the spectator; and this quality delights the eye
quite as much as formal decoration, which the architecture
of the seventeenth century in America almost
completely lacked.</p>
<p>The Puritan had his failings; and this lack of
decoration was perhaps the most important one in
architecture. In his devotion to books and in his
love for music, even psalm-music, the Puritan was
not immune to art; but he was suspicious of the
image, and one is tempted to read into his idol-breaking<span class="pagenum">[28]</span>
a positive visual defect, akin to the Daltonism
or color blindness of the Quakers. Whereas
medieval architecture had cherished the sculptor
and the painter, even in the commonest vernacular
work, the Puritans looked upon every diversion of
the eye as a diversion from the Lord, and, by forbidding
a respectable union between the artist and
the useful arts, they finally turned the artist out on
the streets, to pander to the first fine gentleman
who would give him a kind word or a coin. Whereas
Puritan buildings in the seventeenth century were
straightforward and honestly bent to fulfill their
functions, the Puritan did not see that ornament
itself may be functional, too, when it expresses some
positive gesture of the spirit. The bareness of the
seventeenth century paved the way for the finicking
graces of the eighteenth.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>In essentials, however, both the life and the architecture
of the first provincial period are sound.
While agriculture is the mainstay of life, and
the medieval tradition flourishes, the New England
village reaches a pretty fair pitch of worldly<span class="pagenum">[29]</span>
perfection; and beneath all the superficial changes
that affected it in the next century and a half,
its sturdy framework held together remarkably
well.</p>
<p>Consider the village itself. In the center is a
common, a little to one side will be the meeting-house,
perhaps a square barnlike structure, with a
hipped roof and a cupola, like that at Hingham;
and adjacent or across the way will be the grammar
school. Along the roads where the houses are set
at regular intervals is a great columnar arcade of
elm trees. All these elements are essential to our
early provincial architecture, and without them it
would be a little bare and forbidding. The trees,
above all, are an important part of New England
architecture: in summer they absorb the moisture
and cool the air, besides giving shade; in the winter
their huge boles serve as a partial windbrake; even
the humus from their leaves keeps the soil of the
lawns in better order. The apple trees that cling
to the warmer side of the house are not less essential.
Would it be an exaggeration to say that there
has never been a more complete and intelligent partnership
between the earth and man than existed, for
a little while, in the old New England village? In<span class="pagenum">[30]</span>
what other part of the world has such a harmonious
balance between the natural and the social environment
been preserved?</p>
<p>Nowadays we have begun to talk about garden
cities, and we realize that the essential elements in
a garden-city are the common holding of land by
the community, and the coöperative ownership and
direction of the community itself. We refer to all
these things as if they represented a distinct achievement
of modern thought; but the fact of the matter
is that the New England village up to the middle
of the eighteenth century was a garden-city in every
sense that we now apply to that term, and happily
its gardens and its harmonious framework have frequently
lingered on, even though the economic foundations
have long been overthrown.</p>
<p>This is a medieval tradition in American architecture
which should be of some use to our architects
and city planners; for it is a much more substantial
matter than the building of perpendicular churches
or Tudor country-houses in painfully archæological
adaptations. If we wish to tie up with our colonial
tradition we must recover more than the architectural
forms: we must recover the interests, the standards,
the institutions that gave to the villages and<span class="pagenum">[31]</span>
buildings of early times their appropriate shapes.
To do much less than this is merely to bring back
a fad which might as well be Egyptian as “colonial”
for all the sincerity that it exhibits.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[35]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_TWO">CHAPTER TWO<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">THE HERITAGE OF THE RENAISSANCE</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>The forces that undermined the medieval civilization
of Europe sapped the vitality from the little
centers it had deposited in America. What happened
in the course of three or four centuries in Europe
took scarcely a hundred years on this side of the
Atlantic.</p>
<p>Economically and culturally, the village community
had been pretty well self-contained; it scraped
along on its immediate resources, and if it could not
purchase for itself the “best of everything” it at
least made the most of what it had. In every detail
of house construction, from the setting of fireplaces
to the slope of the roof, there were local peculiarities
which distinguished not merely the Dutch
settlements from the English, but which even characterized
several settlements in Rhode Island that were
scarcely a day’s tramp apart. The limitation of
materials, and the carpenter’s profound ignorance
of “style” made for freedom and diversity. It remained<span class="pagenum">[36]</span>
for the eighteenth century to erect a single
canon of taste.</p>
<p>With the end of the seventeenth century the economic
basis of provincial life shifted from the farm
to the sea. This change had the same effect upon
New England, where the village-community proper
alone had flourished, that fur-trading had had upon
New York: it broke up the internal unity of the
village by giving separate individuals the opportunity
by what was literally a “lucky haul,” to
achieve a position of financial superiority. Fishermen
are the miners of the water. Instead of the
long, watchful care that the farmer must exercise
from planting time to harvest, fishing demands a
sharp eye and a quick, hard stroke of work; and
since what the Germans call <i lang="de">Sitzfleisch</i> is not one of
the primary qualities of a free lad, it is no wonder
that the sea weaned the young folks of New England
away from the drudgeries of its boulder-strewn
farms. With fishing, trading, and building wooden
vessels for sale in foreign ports, riches poured into
maritime New England; and what followed scarcely
needs an explanation.</p>
<p>These villages ceased to be communities of farmers,
working the land and standing squarely on their<span class="pagenum">[37]</span>
own soil: they became commercial towns which, instead
of trading for a living, simply lived for trade.
With this change, castes arose; first, the division
between the poor and the rich, and then between
craftsmen and merchants, between the independent
workers and the menials. The common concerns of
all the townsfolk took second rank: the privileges
of the great landlords and merchants warped the
development of the community. Boston, by the
middle of the eighteenth century, was rich in public
buildings, including four schoolhouses, seventeen
churches, a Town House, a Province House, and
Faneuil Hall—a pretty large collection for a town
whose twenty thousand inhabitants would scarcely
fill a single block of tenements in the Bronx. But
by this time a thousand inhabitants were set down
as poor, and an almshouse and a workhouse had
been provided for them.</p>
<p>With the rise of the merchant class, the industrial
guild began to weaken, as it had weakened in
Europe during the Renaissance. For about a hundred
years the carpenter-builder continued to remain
on the scene, and work in his forthright and
painstaking and honest manner; but in the middle
of the eighteenth century he was joined, for the<span class="pagenum">[38]</span>
first time, by the professional architect, the first one
being probably Peter Harrison, who designed the
Redwood Library, which still stands in Newport.
Under competition with architects and amateurs of
taste, the carpenter-builder lost his position as an
independent craftsman, building intelligently for his
equals: he was forced to meet the swift, corrosive
influences brought in from foreign lands by men
who had visited the ports of the world; and he must
set his sails in order to catch the new winds of
fashion.</p>
<p>What were these winds, and what effect did they
have upon the architecture of the time?</p>
<p>Most of the influences that came by way of trade
affected only the accent of architecture; the language
remained a homely vernacular. In the middle
of the eighteenth century China sent over wallpaper;
and in the Metropolitan Museum there is an
American lacquered cabinet dated as early as 1700,
decorated with obscure little Chinese figures in
gilded gesso. “China” itself came in to take the
place of pewter and earthenware in the finer
houses; while in the gardens of the great manors,
pavilions and pagodas, done more or less in the
Chinese manner, were fashionable. Even Thomas<span class="pagenum">[39]</span>
Jefferson, with his impeccably classical taste, designed
such a pavilion for Monticello before the
Revolution.</p>
<p>This specific Chinese influence was part of that
large, eclectic Oriental influence of the eighteenth
century. The cultural spirit that produced Montesquieu’s
Lettres Persanes also led to the translation
of the Chinese and Persian and Sanskrit classics,
and by a more direct route brought home Turkish
dressing-gowns, turbans, and slippers to Boston
merchants. In Copley’s painting of Nicholas Boylston,
in 1767, these Turkish ornaments rise comically
against the suggestion of a Corinthian pillar
in the background; and this pillar recalls to us the
principal influence of the time—that of classic civilization.
This influence entered America first as a
motif in decoration, and passed out only after it had
become a dominating motive in life.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>The Renaissance was an orientation of the European
mind towards the forms of Roman and Greek
civilization, and towards the meaning of classical
culture. On the latter side its impulse was plainly<span class="pagenum">[40]</span>
a liberating one: it delivered the human soul from
a cell of torments in which there were no modulating
interests or activities between the base satisfactions
of the temporal life and the beatitudes of
heaven. With the Renaissance the god-beast became,
once again, a man. Moreover, just when the
Catholic culture of Christendom was breaking down
under the influence of heresy and skepticism, the
classics brought to the educated men of Europe a
common theme which saved them from complete intellectual
vagrancy. The effect of classical civilization,
on the other hand, was not an unmixed good:
for it served all too quickly to stereotype in old
forms a spirit which had been freshly reborn, and
it set up a servile principle in the arts which has
in part been responsible for the wreck of both taste
and craftsmanship.</p>
<p>The first builders of the Renaissance, in Italy, were
not primarily architects; they were rather supreme
artists in the minor crafts; and their chief failing
was, perhaps, that they wished to stamp with their
personal imprint all the thousand details of sculpture,
painting, and carving which had hitherto been
left to the humble craftsman. Presently, the technical
knowledge of the outward treatment of a building<span class="pagenum">[41]</span>
became a touchstone to success; and a literal
understanding of the products of antiquity took the
place in lesser men of personal inspiration. The
result was that architecture became more and more
a thing of paper designs and exact archæological
measurements; the workman was condemned to carry
out in a faithful, slavish way the details which the
architect himself had acquired in similar fashion.
So the architect ceased to be a master-builder working
among comrades of wide experience and travel:
he became a Renaissance gentleman who merely gave
orders to his servants.</p>
<p>Victor Hugo said in Notre Dame that the printing-press
destroyed architecture, which had hitherto
been the stone record of mankind. The real misdemeanor
of the printing-press, however, was not
that it took literary values away from architecture,
but that it caused architecture to derive its
value from literature. With the Renaissance the
great modern distinction between the literate and
the illiterate extends even to building; the master
mason who knew his stone and his workmen and his
tools and the tradition of his art gave way to the
architect who knew his Palladio and his Vignola and
his Vitruvius. Architecture, instead of striving to<span class="pagenum">[42]</span>
leave the imprint of a happy spirit on the superficies
of a building, became a mere matter of grammatical
accuracy and pronunciation; and the seventeenth-century
architects who revolted from this
regime and created the baroque were at home only
in the pleasure gardens and theaters of princes. For
the common run of architects, particularly in the
northern countries, the Five Orders became as unchallengeable
as the eighty-one rules of Latin syntax.
To build with a pointed arch was barbarous,
to build with disregard for formal symmetry was
barbarous, to permit the common workman to carry
out his individual taste in carving was to risk vulgarity
and pander to an obsolete sense of democracy.
The classics had, it is true, united Europe anew in
a catholic culture; but alas! it was only the leisured
upper classes who could fully take possession of the
new kingdom of the mind. The Five Orders remained
firmly entrenched on one side, the “lower
orders” on the other.</p>
<p>Hereafter, architecture lives by the book. First
it is Palladio and Vignola; then it is Burlington and
Chambers; then, after the middle of the eighteenth
century, the brothers Adam and Stuart’s Antiquities
of Athens. Simpler works with detailed prescriptions<span class="pagenum">[43]</span>
for building in the fashionable mode made
their way in the late seventeenth century among the
smaller fry of carpenters and builders; and they
were widely used in America, as a guide to taste and
technique, right down to the middle of the nineteenth
century. It was by means of the book that the
architecture of the eighteenth century from St.
Petersburg to Philadelphia seemed cast by a single
mind. We call the mode Georgian because vast
quantities of such building was done in England,
as a result of the general commercial prosperity of
that country; but it was common wherever European
civilization had any fresh architectural effort to
make, and if we call this style “colonial” in America
it is not to mark any particular lapse or lack of
distinction.</p>
<p>The Renaissance in architecture had reached
England at about the time of the Great Fire (1666),
fully two generations after the Italian influence had
made its way into English literature; and it came
to America, as one might guess, about a generation
later. It was left for Alexander Pope, who himself
was a dutiful Augustan, to sum up the situation
with classic precision to Lord Burlington, who had
published Palladio’s Antiquities of Rome:</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[44]</span></p>
<div class="poetry-container">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="indentquote0">“You show us Rome was glorious, not profuse,
</div><div class="indent0">And pompous buildings once were things of use.
</div><div class="indent0">Yet shall, my lord, your just and noble rules
</div><div class="indent0">Fill half the land with imitation fools;
</div><div class="indent0">Who random drawings from your sheets shall take
</div><div class="indent0">And of one beauty many blunders make.”
</div></div></div></div>
<p>These lines were a warning and a prophecy. The
warning was timely; and the prophecy came true,
except in those districts in which the carpenter continued
to ply his craft without the overlordship of
the architect.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>The first effect of the Renaissance forms in America
was not to destroy the vernacular but to perfect
it; for it provided the carpenter-builder, whose distance
from Europe kept him from profiting by the
spirited work of his forbears, with a series of ornamental
motifs. New England, under the influence
of an idol-breaking Puritanism, had been singularly
poor in decoration, as I have already observed: its
modest architectural effects relied solely on mass,
color, and a nice disposition of parts. In its decorative
aspects medievalism had left but a trace in<span class="pagenum">[45]</span>
America: the carved grotesque heads on the face of
the Van Cortlandt Mansion in New York, and the
painted decorations in some of the older houses and
barns among the Pennsylvania Dutch pretty well
complete the tally.</p>
<p>Classical motifs served to fill the blank in provincial
architecture. As long as the carpenter worked
by himself, the classic influence was confined to little
details like the fanlights, the moldings, the pillars
of the portico, and so on. In the rural districts of
New England, from Maine to Connecticut, and in
certain parts of New York and New Jersey and
Pennsylvania, the carpenter keeps on building in
his solid, traditional manner down to the time that
the jig-saw overwhelms a mechanically hypnotized
age; and even through the jig-saw period in the
older regions, the proportions and the plan remained
close to tradition. The classical did not in fact
supplant the vernacular until the last vestiges of the
guild and the village-community had passed away,
and the economic conditions appropriate to the
Renaissance culture had made their appearance.</p>
<p>The dwelling house slowly became more habitable
during this period: the skill in shipbuilding which
every sheltered inlet gave evidence of was carried<span class="pagenum">[46]</span>
back into the home, and in the paneling of the walls
and the general tidiness and compactness of the
apartments, a shipshape order comes more and more
to prevail. The plastered ceiling makes its appearance,
and the papered wall; above all, white paint
is introduced on the inside and outside of the house.</p>
<p>Besides giving more light, this innovation surely
indicates that chimney flues had become more satisfactory.
Paint was no doubt introduced to keep the
torrid summer sun from charring the exposed clapboards;
and white paint was used, despite the expense
of white lead, for the reason that it accorded
with the chaste effect which was inseparable in the
eighteenth-century mind from classic precedent.</p>
<p>Indeed, the whiteness of our colonial architecture
is an essential characteristic; it dazzled Dickens on
his first visit to America, and made him think that
all the houses had been built only yesterday. The
esthetic reason for delighting in these white colonial
farmhouses is simple: white and white alone fully
reflects the surrounding lights; white and white
alone gives a pure blue or lavender shadow against
the sunlight. At dawn, a white house is pale pink
and turquoise; at high noon it is clear yellow and
lavender-blue; in a ripe sunset it is orange and<span class="pagenum">[47]</span>
purple; in short, except on a gray day it is anything
but white. These old white houses, if they seem a
little sudden and sharp in the landscape, are at least
part of the sky: one finds them stretched on a slight
rise above the highroad like a seagull with poised
wings, or a cloud above the treetops. Were anything
needed to make visible the deterioration of
American life which the nineteenth century brought
with it, the habit of painting both wood and brick
gray should perhaps be sufficient.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>If the architecture of the early eighteenth century
in America is a little prim and angular, if it
never rises far above a sturdy provincialism, it is
not without its own kind of interest; and Faneuil
Hall, for example, is not the worst of Boston’s buildings,
though it is overshadowed by the great utilitarian
hulks that line the streets about it. By studying
the classical forms at one remove, the builders
of the eighteenth century in America had the same
kind of advantage that Wren had in England.
Wren’s “Renaissance” churches, with their box-like
naves and their series of superimposed orders for<span class="pagenum">[48]</span>
steeples, had no parallel, so far as I am aware,
in Italy, and certainly had no likeness to anything
that had been built in classic times: they were the
products of a playful and original fancy, like the
mermaid. Mere knowledge, mere imitation, would
never have achieved Renaissance architecture; it was
the very imperfection of the knowledge and discipleship
that made it the appropriate shell of its
age. Coming to America in handbooks and prints,
chastely rendered, the models of antiquity were,
down to the Revolution, followed just so far as they
conveniently served. Instead of curbing invention,
they gave it a more definite problem to work upon.</p>
<p>It was a happy accident that made the carpenter-builders
and cabinet makers of America see their
China, their Paris, their Rome through a distance,
dimly. What those who admire the eighteenth century
style do not, perhaps, see is that an accident
cannot be recovered. However painstakingly we
may cut the waistcoat, the stock, the knee-breeches
of an eighteenth-century costume, it is now only a
fancy dress: its “moment” in history is over. The
same principle holds true for Georgian or colonial
architecture, even more than it does for that of the
seventeenth century; for one might, indeed, conceive<span class="pagenum">[49]</span>
of a breakdown in the transportation system
or the credit system which would force a builder to
rely for a while upon the products of his own region;
whereas, while our civilization remains intact there
are a hundred handbooks, measured drawings, and
photographs which make a naïve recovery of antiquity
impossible.</p>
<p>Once we have genuinely appreciated the influence
that created early colonial architecture, we see that
it is irrecoverable: what we call a revival is really
a second burial. All the king’s horses and all the
king’s men have been hauling and tugging vigorously
during the last fifty years to bring back the simple
beauties and graces of the colonial dwelling, and the
collectors’ hunt for the products of the Salem, Newburyport
and Philadelphia cabinetmakers is a long
and merry one; but the only beneficent effect of
this movement has been the preservation of a handful
of antiquities, which would otherwise have been
impiously torn down. What we have built in the
colonial mode is all very well in its way: unfortunately,
it bears the same relation to the work of the
late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries that
the Woolworth Building bears to the cathedrals of
the Middle Age, or the patriotism of the National
Security League to the principles of Franklin and
Jefferson. Photographic accuracy, neatly touched
up—this is its capital virtue, and plainly, it has
precious little to do with a living architecture. Like
the ruined chapel in The Pirates of Penzance, our
modern colonial houses are often attached to ancestral
estates that were established—a year ago;
and if their occupants are “descendants by purchase,”
what shall we say of their architects?</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[53]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_THREE">CHAPTER THREE<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">THE CLASSICAL MYTH</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>The transformation of European society and its
material shell that took place during the period we
call the Renaissance is associated with the break-up
of the town economy and its replacement by a mercantile
economy devoted to the advantage of the
State. Along with this goes the destruction of the
village community, and the predominance in social
affairs of a landholding oligarchy who have thrown
off feudal responsibilities while they have retained
most of the feudal privileges, and a merchant class,
buttressed by riches derived from war, piracy, and
sharp trade.</p>
<p>America reproduced in miniature the changes that
were taking place in Europe. Because of its isolation
and the absence of an established social order,
it showed these changes without the blur and confusion
that attended them abroad.</p>
<p>It is sometimes a little difficult to tell whether
the classical modes of building were a result of
these changes in society or, among other things, an<span class="pagenum">[54]</span>
incentive to them; whether the classical frame fitted
the needs of the time, or whether men’s activities
expanded to occupy the idolum that had seized their
imagination. At any rate, the notion that the
classical taste in architecture developed mainly
through technical interests in design will not hold;
for the severely classical shell arose only in regions
where the social conditions had laid a foundation
for the classical myth.</p>
<p>The first development of the grand style in the
American renaissance was in the manors of Virginia
and Maryland. It came originally through an
imitation of the country houses of England, and
then, after the Revolutionary War, it led to a direct
adaptation of the Roman villa and the Greek temple.
One does not have to go very deep to fetch up the
obvious parallel between the land-monopoly and
slavery that prevailed in the American manors and
the conditions that permitted the Roman villa itself
to assume its stately proportions; nor need one dwell
too long upon the natural subordination, in this
regime, of the carpenter-builder to the gentleman-architect.
“In the town palaces and churches,” as
Mr. Fiske Kimball justly says, “there was a strong
contradiction between modern conditions and ancient<span class="pagenum">[55]</span>
forms, so that it was only in the country that
Palladio’s ideas of domestic architecture could come
to a clear and successful expression. These monuments,
since so much neglected, served in Palladio’s
book expressly to represent the ‘Antients’ designs of
country-houses....’”</p>
<p>At his death, Robert Carter, who had been Rector
of the College, Speaker of the Burgesses, President
of the Council, Acting Governor of Virginia, and
Proprietor of the Northern Neck, was described in
the Gentleman’s Magazine of 1732 as the possessor
of an estate of 300,000 acres of land, about 1,000
slaves, and ten thousand pounds. Pliny the Younger
might well have been proud of such an estate. On
a substantial basis like this, a Palladian mansion
was possible; and up and down the land, wherever
the means justified the end, Palladian mansions were
built.</p>
<p>The really striking thing about the architecture of
Manorial America with its great dignity and its
sometimes striking beauty of detail or originality of
design—as in the staircase at Berry Hill which
creates a flaring pattern like butterfly’s wings—the
striking thing is the fact that the work is not the
product of a specialized education; it is rather the<span class="pagenum">[56]</span>
outcome of a warm, loving, and above all intelligent
commerce with the past, in the days before Horseback
Hall had become as aimless and empty as
Heartbreak House. Mr. Arthur T. Bolton, the
biographer of the brothers Adam, has exhibited
letters from Robert Adam’s patrons in England
which mark their avid and precise interest in classical
forms; and without doubt a little digging would
uncover similar examples in America.</p>
<p>These educated eighteenth-century gentlemen,
these contemporaries of “Junius” and Gibbon, who
had read Horace and Livy and Plutarch, had one
foot in their own age, and the other in the grave of
Rome. In America, Thomas Jefferson exemplified
this whole culture at its best and gave it a definite
stamp: he combined in almost equal degrees the
statesman, the student, and the artist. Not merely
did Jefferson design his own Monticello; he executed
a number of other houses for the surrounding gentry—Shadwell,
Edgehill, Farrington—to say nothing
of the Virginia State Capitol and the church and
university at Charlottesville. It was Jefferson who
in America first gave a strict interpretation to
classicism; for he had nothing but contempt for
the free, Georgian vernacular which was making its<span class="pagenum">[57]</span>
way among those who regarded the classical past as
little more than a useful embellishment.</p>
<p>The contrast between the classical and the vernacular,
between the architecture of the plantation
and the architecture of the village, between the work
of the craftsman, and the work of the gentleman
and the professional architect, became even more
marked after the Revolutionary War. As a result
of that re-crystallization of American society, the
conditions of classical culture and classical civilization
were for a short time fused in the activities of
the community, even in the town. One may express
the transformation in a crude way by saying that
the carpenter-builder had been content with a classical
finish; the architects of the early republic worked
upon a classical foundation. It was the Revolution
itself, I believe, that turned the classical taste into
a myth which had the power to move men and
mold their actions.</p>
<p>The merchant who has spent his hours in the
counting house and on the quay cannot with the most
lofty effort convert himself into a classical hero.
It is different with men who have spent long nights
and days wrangling in the State House, men who
have ridden on horseback through a campaign, men<span class="pagenum">[58]</span>
who have plotted like Catiline and denounced like
Cicero, men whose daily actions are governed with
the fine resolution of a Roman general or dictator.
Unconsciously, such men want a stage to set off
and magnify their actions. King Alfred can perhaps
remain a king, though he stays in a cottage
and minds the cakes on the griddle; but most of us
need a little scenery and ritual to confirm these high
convictions. If the tailors had not produced the
frock-coat, Daniel Webster would have had to invent
one. The merchant wants his little comforts and
conveniences; at most, he desires the architect to
make his gains conspicuous; but the hero who has
drawn his sword or addressed an assembly wants
elbow room for gestures. His parlor must be big
enough for a public meeting, his dining room for a
banquet. So it follows that whereas under pre-Revolutionary
conventions even civic buildings like
Independence Hall in Philadelphia are built on a
domestic scale, the early republican architecture is
marked by the practice of building its domestic
dwellings on a public scale. The fine houses of the
early republic all have an official appearance; almost
any house might be the White House.</p>
<p>Even when Dickens made his first visit to America,<span class="pagenum">[59]</span>
the classical myth and the classical hero had not
altogether disappeared: one has a painful memory
of the “mother of the modern Gracchi,” and one
sees how the republican hero had been vulgarized
into a Jacksonian caricature like General Cyrus
Choke. For a whole generation the classical myth
held men in its thrall; the notion of returning to a
pagan polity, quaintly modified by deism, was a
weapon of the radical forces in both America and
France. Jean Jacques himself preached the virtues
of Sparta and Rome in Le Contrat Social, as well
as the state of nature which he praised in Emile;
and, in general, “radicalism” associated itself with
the worship of rule and reason, as opposed to the
caprice, the irrationality, the brute traditionalism
of what the children of that age then characterized
as “Gothic superstition.” Almost within his lifetime
Washington became Divus Cæsar, and if a monument
was not built to him immediately, a city was
named after him, as Alexandria had been named
after Alexander. Did not the very war-veterans become
the Society of the Cincinnati; did not the first
pioneers on the westward march sprinkle names like
Utica and Ithaca and Syracuse over the Mohawk
trail; and did not a few ex-soldiers go back to their<span class="pagenum">[60]</span>
Tory neighbor’s plow? As Rome and Greece embodied
the political interests of the age, so did classical
architecture provide the appropriate shell.
Even those who were not vitally touched by the
dominant interests of the period were not immune
to the fashion, once it had been set.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>In New England, not unnaturally, the influence of
the merchant prevailed in architecture for a longer
time, perhaps, than it did elsewhere. Samuel McIntire,
a carver of figureheads for ships and moldings
for cabins, provided an interior setting in the
fashion of Robert Adam, which enabled the merchant
of Salem to live like a lord in Berkeley Square;
and Bulfinch, a merchant’s son, began by repairing
his father’s house, went on a grand tour of Europe,
and returned to a lucrative practice which included
the first monument on Bunker Hill, and the first
theater opened in Boston. Under McIntire’s assiduous
and scholarly hands, the low-lying traditional
farmhouse was converted into the bulky square house
with its hipped roof, its classical pilasters, its frequently
ill-proportioned cupola, its “captain’s<span class="pagenum">[61]</span>
walk,” or “widow’s walk.” The merchant with his
eye for magnitude lords it over the farmer with his
homely interest in the wind and the weather; and so
McIntire, the last great figure in a dying line of
craftsmen-artists, is compelled to make up by wealth
of ornament a beauty which the earlier provincial
houses had achieved by adaptation to the site without,
and to subtlety of proportion within. The
standard of conspicuous waste, as Mr. Thorstein
Veblen would call it, spread from the manor to the
city mansion.</p>
<p>Throughout the rest of the country, the pure
classical myth created the mold of American architecture,
and buildings that were not informed by
this myth attempted some sort of mimicry, like the
mansion Squire Jones built for Marmaduke Temple
in Cooper’s The Pioneers. There are churches standing
in New Jersey and New York, for example, built
as late as 1850, which at a distance have the outlines
and proportions of classic buildings, either in
the earlier style of Wren, or in the more severe and
stilted Greek manner favored by a later generation.
It is only on closer inspection that one discovers
that the ornament has become an illiterate reminiscence;
that the windows are bare openings; that<span class="pagenum">[62]</span>
the orders have lost their proportions, and that,
unlike the wandering mechanic, who “with a
few soiled plates of English architecture” helped
Squire Jones, the builder could no longer pretend
to talk learnedly “of friezes, entablatures, and particularly
of the composite order.” Alas for a
bookish architecture when the taste for reading
disappears!</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>The dominant designs of the early republican
period proceeded directly or indirectly from such
books as Stuart’s Antiquities of Athens, and from
such well-known examples of temple architecture in
southern Europe as the Maison Carrée at Nîmes.
In one sense, there was a certain fitness in adapting
the Greek methods of building to America. Originally,
the Greek temple had probably been a wooden
building. Its columns were trees, its cornices exposed
beams; and the fact that in America one could
again build mightily in wood may have furnished an
extra incentive to the erection of these colossal
buildings. The fact that the Greek mode in America
was well under way before the first example of it<span class="pagenum">[63]</span>
had appeared in Edinburgh, London, or Paris, shows
perhaps that time and place both favored its introduction
on this side of the Atlantic: for the
availability of certain materials often, no doubt,
directs the imagination to certain forms.</p>
<p>On the whole, however, the Greek temple precedent
was a bad one. For one thing, since the Greek <i lang="grc">cella</i>
had no source of light except the doorway, it was
necessary to introduce modifications in the elevation,
and to break up the interior; and it was only in the
South that the vast shadowed retreats formed by
porches and second-story balconies proved a happy
adaptation to the climate. Again: Greek architecture
was an architecture of exteriors, designed
for people who spent the greater part of the year
out of doors. With no temple ritual comparable
to the services of the church or cathedral, the
Greeks lavished their attention upon externals, and
as a great admirer of the Greeks, Sir Reginald Blomfield
well says, “may have been more successful with
the outside of their buildings than with the inside.”
To fail with the interior in a northern climate is to
fail with the essentials of a habitation; and these
vast rooms, for all their ornament, too often remained
bleak.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[64]</span></p>
<p>Even on the esthetic side, the Greek style of building
was not a full-blown success. With all their
strict arrangement of the classic orders, with all
their nice proportions, the muted white exteriors
resembled a genuine Greek temple in the way that a
sepia photograph would represent a sunrise—the
warm tones, the colors, the dancing procession of
sculptures were absent; it was a thinned and watered
Greece that they called to mind. Indeed, the disciples
of the Age of Reason and white perukes would
have been horrified, I have no doubt, at the “barbarism”
of the original Greek temples, as they would
doubtless also have been at the meanness of the
dwellings in which Pericles or Thucydides must have
lived. Once the temple-house ceased to be a stage
upon which the myth of classicism could be enacted,
it ceased also to be a home. For who wishes to
live in a temple? That is a spiritual exercise we
do not demand even of a priest. Small wonder that
the temple lingered longest in the South, where,
down to the Civil War, gangs of slaves supported the
dignity of the masters and a large household diminished
the chilly sense of solitude.</p>
<p>It was in public architecture that the early
republic succeeded best, and it was here that its<span class="pagenum">[65]</span>
influence lingered longest, for down to 1840 well-designed
buildings in the classic mode, like the Sub-Treasury
building in New York, were still put up.
The work of McComb in New York, Hoadley in Connecticut,
Latrobe in Pennsylvania and Maryland, to
mention only a few of the leading architects, represents
the high-water mark of professional design in
America; and the fact that in spite of the many hands
that worked upon it the Capitol at Washington is
still a fairly coherent structure is a witness to the
strength of their tradition. For all its minor felicities,
however, we must not make the mistake of the
modern revivalists, like Mr. Fiske Kimball, who urge
the acceptance of the classic tradition in America as
a foundation for a general modern style. Form and
function are too far divorced in the classic mode to
permit the growth of an architecture which will
proceed on all fours in houses and public buildings,
and factories and barns; moreover, there are too
many new structures in the modern world which the
builders of Rome or the Renaissance have not even
dimly anticipated. In medieval building the town
hall is a different sort of building from the cathedral:
using the same elements, perhaps, it nevertheless
contrives an altogether different effect. In the<span class="pagenum">[66]</span>
architecture of the early republic, on the other hand,
the treasury building might be a church, and the
church might be a mansion, for any external differentiation
one can observe—in fact, the only ecclesiastical
feeling that goes with the churches of the time
is a cold deism, or an equally cold Protestant faith
which has lost entirely the memories and associations
of the intervening centuries. This sort of
architecture achieves order and dignity, not by composing
differences, but by canceling them. Its
standards do not inhere in the building, but are laid
on outside of it. When the purpose of the structure
happens to conform to the style, the result
may be admirable in every way. When it does not
happen to conform the result is tedious and
banal; and, to tell the truth, a great deal of the
architecture of the early republic is tedious and
banal.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>One further effect of the classic mode has still
to be noted: the introduction of formal city design,
by the French engineer, Major L’Enfant, in the laying
out of Washington. Stirred by the memory of<span class="pagenum">[67]</span>
the grand design of Paris under Louis XIV, with
its radiating avenues that cut through the city in
the way that riding lanes cut through the hunting
forest, L’Enfant sought to superimpose a dignified
pattern upon the rectangular plan provided
by the commissioners of Washington. By putting
the major public buildings in key positions, by providing
for a proper physical relation between the
various departments of the government, by planning
spacious avenues of approach, culminating in
squares, triangles, and round-points, Major L’Enfant
gave great dignity to the new capital city, and
even though in the years that followed his plan was
often ignored and overridden, it still maintained a
monumental framework for the administrative buildings
of the American State.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, if Washington has the coherence
of a formal plan, it also has its abstractness: contrived
to set off and serve the buildings of the
government, it exercised no control over domestic
building, over business, over the manifold economic
functions of the developing city. The framework was
excellent, if cities could live by government alone.
By laying too much stress on formal order, the
exponents of classic taste paved the way for the all<span class="pagenum">[68]</span>
too formal order of the gridiron plan, and since the
gridiron development was suited to hasty commercial
exploitation, while the mode of Washington
was not, it was in this mold that the architecture of
the nineteenth century was cast.</p>
<p>Within a short while after its introduction in New
York in 1811 the effects of the rectangular streets
and rectangular lots became evident; whereas the
prints of New York before 1825 show a constant
variety in the elevation and layout of houses, those
after this date resemble more and more standardized
boxes. Long monotonous streets that terminated
nowhere, filled by rows of monotonous houses—this
was the net contribution of the formal plan. Classical
taste was not responsible for these enormities—but
on the whole it did nothing to check them, and
since the thrifty merchants of New York could not
understand L’Enfant’s plan for Washington, they
seized upon that part of it which was intelligible:
its regularity, its appearance of order.</p>
<p>With the new forces that were at work on the
American scene, with the disintegration of classical
culture under the combined influence of pioneer enterprise,
mechanical invention, overseas commerce,
and the almost religious cult of utilitarianism, all<span class="pagenum">[69]</span>
this was indeed inevitable. What happened to the
proud, Roman-patterned republic of 1789 is a
matter of common knowledge. Benjamin Latrobe,
the British architect who contributed so much to the
Capitol at Washington—including a new order of
corn stalks and tobacco leaves—was a witness to
the disintegration of the age and the dissolution
of its world of ideas; and there is a familiar ring
to his commentary upon it:</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<p>“I remember [he says in his autobiography] the
time when I was over head and ears in love with Man
in a State of Nature.... Social Compacts were
my hobbies; the American Revolution—I ask its pardon,
for it deserves better company—was a sort of
dream of the Golden Age; and the French Revolution
was the Golden Age itself. I should be ashamed
to confess all this if I had not a thousand companions
in my kaleidoscopic amusement, and those generally
men of ardent, benevolent, and well-informed
minds and excellent hearts. Alas! experience has
destroyed the illusion, the kaleidoscope is broken,
and all the tinsel of scenery that glittered so delightfully
is translated and turned to raggedness.
A dozen years’ residence at the Republican court of<span class="pagenum">[70]</span>
Washington had affected wonderfully the advance
of riper years.”</p></div>
<p>Major L’Enfant’s plan for Washington was the
last gasp, it seems to me, of the classical order;
Jefferson’s University of Virginia was perhaps its
most perfect consummation, for Jefferson had
planned for the life of the institution as well as for
the shell which was to contain it. Before the nineteenth
century was long under way men’s minds
ceased to move freely within the classical idolum;
and by 1860 the mood was obliterated and a large
part of the work had been submerged or destroyed.
The final ironic commentary upon the dignity and
austerity of the earlier temples is illustrated in a
house in Kennebunkport, Maine; for there the serene,
pillared façade is broken up in the rear by a
later, and alas! a necessary addition: a two-story
bow-window projected far enough beyond the eaves
to give a little light to the occupants of the rooms!</p>
<p>In sum, there was a pathetic incompatibility in
this architecture between need and achievement, between
pretensions and matter-of-fact—a rigid opposition
to common sense that a vernacular, however
playful, would never countenance. These temples<span class="pagenum">[71]</span>
were built with the marmoreal gesture of eternity;
they satisfied the desire and fashion of the moment;
and today their ghosts parade before us, brave but
incredible.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[75]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_FOUR">CHAPTER FOUR<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">THE DIASPORA OF THE PIONEER</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>From the standpoint of architecture, the early
part of the nineteenth century was a period of disintegration.
The gap between sheer utility and art,
which the Renaissance had emphasized, was widened
with the coming of machinery. That part of architecture
which was touched by industrialism became
crude beyond belief: the new mills and factories were
usually packing boxes, lacking in light and ventilation,
and the homes of the factory workers, when
they were not the emptied houses of merchants and
tradesmen, made to serve a dozen families instead of
the original one, were little more than covered pens,
as crowded as a cattle market. At the same time that
the old forms were undermined by the new methods
of mechanical production, a sentimental longing to
retain those forms, just because they were old, seized
men’s minds; and so industrialism and romanticism
divided the field of architecture between them.</p>
<p>It was no accident that caused romanticism and
industrialism to appear at the same time. They<span class="pagenum">[76]</span>
were rather the two faces of the new civilization, one
looking towards the past, and the other towards the
future; one glorifying the new, the other clinging to
the old; industrialism intent on increasing the physical
means of subsistence, romanticism living in a
sickly fashion on the hollow glamour of the past.
The age not merely presented these two aspects; it
sought to enjoy each of them. Where industrialism
took root, the traditions of architecture were disregarded;
where romanticism flourished, on the other
hand, in the mansions, public buildings, and
churches, architecture became capricious and absurd,
and it returned to a past that had never existed.
Against the gross callousness which a Bounderby
exhibited toward beauty and amenity, there was only
the bland piety of a Pecksniff.</p>
<p>The dream that is dying and the dream that is
coming to birth do not stand in sequence, but mingle
as do the images in a dissolving view; and during the
very years that the architecture of the Renaissance,
both in Europe and America, achieved new heights
of formal design, the first factories were being
planted in Staffordshire and Yorkshire, the Duke of
Bridgewater built his famous canal, and Horace
Walpole designed his “Gothic” mansion on Strawberry<span class="pagenum">[77]</span>
Hill. The coincidence of industrialism and
romanticism is just as emphatic in America as in
England; and it is not without historic justice that
the architect who in 1807 designed the chapel of St.
Mary’s Seminary in Baltimore, after the Gothic
fashion, successfully introduced a steam pumping
system in Philadelphia’s waterworks. While the
industrial buildings of the period represented nothing
but a lapse from the current vernacular, due to
haste and insufficient resources, romantic architecture
was a positive influence; and it will perhaps best
serve our purpose to examine the romantic heritage
in its pristine form, rather than in the work of disciples
like Latrobe, whose American practice is dated
about two generations later.</p>
<p>The author of The Castle of Otranto had a perverse
and wayward interest in the past; and the
spirit he exhibited in both his novel and his country
home was typical of the romantic attitude everywhere.
What attracted Walpole to the Gothic style
was little more than the phosphorescence of decay:
he summoned up the ghosts of the Middle Ages but
not the guilds; and instead of admiring the soundness
of medieval masonry, those who followed directly
in his path were affected rather by the spectacle of<span class="pagenum">[78]</span>
its dilapidation, so that the production of authentic
ruins became one of the chief efforts of the eighteenth-century
landscape gardener.</p>
<p>It is not a great step from building a ruin to
building a mansion that is little better than a ruin.
While Walpole defended Strawberry Hill by saying
he did not aim to make his house so Gothic as to
exclude convenience, it happened again and again
that the picturesque was the enemy of simple honesty
and necessity; and just as Walpole himself in his
refectory used wall paper that imitated stucco, so
did other owners and builders use plaster and hangings
and wall paper and carpet to cover up defects
of construction. Towers that no one ever climbed,
turrets that no one could enter, and battlements
that no one rose to defend, took the place of the
classic orders. The drawbridge-and-moat that embellished
Mr. Wemmick’s villa in Great Expectations
was not a wild conceit of Dickens but a relic of Walpole
and his successors.</p>
<p>As a disguise for mean or thoughtless workmanship,
the application of antique “style” was the
romantic contribution to architecture; and it served
very handily during the period of speculative building
and selling that accompanied the growth of the<span class="pagenum">[79]</span>
new industrial towns. Even where style did not conceal
commercial disingenuousness, it covered up a
poverty of imagination in handling the elements of a
building. Gothic touches about doors and the exterior
of windows, and a heap of bric-a-brac and
curios on the inside, softened the gauntness and
bareness of this architecture, or rather, distracted
attention from them. Curiosity was the dominant
mood of the time, acquisitiveness its principal impulse,
and comfort its end. Many good things
doubtless came out of this situation; but architecture
was not one of them.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>Modern industrialism began to take root in America
after the War of Independence, and its effect
was twofold: it started up new villages which centered
about the waterfall or the iron mine and
had scarcely any other concern than industry; at
the same time, by cutting canals which tapped the
interior, it drew life away from the smaller provincial
ports and concentrated commerce and population
in great towns like Boston, Philadelphia, and
New York. In New England, as in the English<span class="pagenum">[80]</span>
Cotswolds from Whitney to Chalford, the mechanical
regime was humanized by the presence of an
older civilization, and the first generation of factory
hands were farmers’ lads and lasses who neither lost
nor endangered their independence; but where the
factory depended upon paupers or immigrants, as
it did in the big towns and in some of the unsettled
parts of the country, the community relapsed into
a barbarism which affected the masters as well as
the hands. There was more than a difference in
literary taste between the Corinths and Bethels named
by an earlier generation and the Mechanicsvilles that
followed them.</p>
<p>The chief watchwords of the time were progress
and expansion. The first belonged to the pioneer
in industry who opened up new areas for mechanical
invention and applied science; the second, to the land
pioneer; and between these two resourceful types
the old ways, were they good or bad, were scrapped,
and the new ways, were they good or bad, were
adopted. Both land pioneering and industrial
pioneering were essentially subdivisions of one occupation,
mining; and, following the clue opened by
Messrs. Geddes and Branford, one may say with
Professor Adshead that the nineteenth century<span class="pagenum">[81]</span>
witnessed “the great attack of the miner on the
peasant.”</p>
<p>Mechanical industry owes its great development
and progress to the work of the woodman and
the miner: the first type of worker takes the bent
sapling and develops the lathe or “bodger” which
is still to be found in the remote parts of the Chiltern
Hills in England, while from the mine itself
not merely comes the steam engine, first used for
pumping out water, but likewise the railway. The
perpetual débris amid which the miner lives forms
a capital contrast with the ordered culture, the careful
weeding and cutting, of field and orchard: almost
any sort of habitation is an advance upon the
squalor of the pithead; and it is not a mere chance
that the era devoted to mining and all its accessory
manufactures was throughout the western world
the dingiest and dirtiest that has yet befouled the
earth. Choked by his own débris, or stirred by the
exhaustion of minerals, the miner’s community runs
down—and he departs.</p>
<p>The name pioneer has a romantic color; but in
America the land pioneer mined the forests and the
soil, and the industry pioneer almost as ruthlessly
mined the human resources, and when the pay-dirt<span class="pagenum">[82]</span>
got sallow and thin, they both moved on. Longfellow’s
allusion to the “bivouac of life” unconsciously
points to the prevailing temper; for even
those who remained in the older American centers
were affected by the pioneer’s malaise and unsettlement;
and they behaved as if at any moment they
might be called to the colors and sent westward.</p>
<p>Beside the vivid promises of Mechanical Progress
and Manifest Destiny the realities of an ordered
society thinned into a pale vapor. In many little
communities Mechanical Societies were formed for
the propagation of the utilitarian faith: industrialism
with its ascetic ritual of unsparing work, its
practice of thrift, its renunciation of the arts,
gathered to itself the religious zeal of Protestantism.
The erection of factories, the digging of canals, the
location of furnaces, the building of roads, the devising
of inventions, not merely exhausted a great part
of the available capital; even more, it occupied the
energy and imagination of the more vigorous spirits.
Two generations before, Thomas Jefferson could
lay out and develop the estate of Monticello; now,
with many of Jefferson’s capacities, Poe could only
dream about the fantastic Domain of Arnheim.
The society around Poe had no more use for an<span class="pagenum">[83]</span>
architectural imagination than the Puritans had for
decorative images; the smoke of the factory-chimney
was incense, the scars on the landscape were as the
lacerations of a saint, and the mere multiplication of
gaunt sheds and barracks was a sign of progress,
and therefore an earnest of perfection.</p>
<p>Did ever so many elements of disintegration come
together at one time and place before? The absence
of tradition and example raised enough difficulties
in Birmingham and Manchester and Lyons
and Essen; but in America it was accentuated by
the restless march of those pioneers who, in the
words of a contemporary economist, “leave laws,
education and the arts, all the essential elements of
civilization, behind them.” What place could architecture
fill in these squatter communities? It could
diminish the hardships of living; it could grease the
channels of gain; and it could demolish or “improve”
so much of the old as it could not understand, as
Bulfinch’s Court House in Newburyport was improved,
and as many a fine city residence was swept
away under the tide of traffic.</p>
<p>These were the days when the log cabin flourished;
but it did not remain long enough in place to become
the well-wrought and decorative piece of rustic<span class="pagenum">[84]</span>
architecture that the better sort of peasant hut, done
with the same materials, became in Russia. A
genuine architectural development might have led
from a crude log cabin to a finished one, from a bare
cabin to an enriched and garnished one, and so,
perhaps, in the course of a century or so, to a
fine country architecture and a great native art
of wood carving comparable to that of the Russian
sculptors today. In America, however, the pioneer
jumped baldly from log cabin to White House, or
its genteel and scroll-sawed equivalent; and the
arts inherent in good building never had a chance to
develop. With the animus of the miner in back of
everything the pioneer attempted, the pioneer’s
architecture was all false-work and scantling.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>The first contribution to the pioneer’s comfort
was Franklin’s ingenious stove (1745). After that
came a number of material appliances. Central
heating gave the American house a Roman standard
of comfort, the astral-oil lamp captivated Edgar
Poe; and cooking stoves, gas-lighting, permanent
bathtubs, and water-closets made their way into the<span class="pagenum">[85]</span>
better sort of house in the Eastern cities before the
middle of the nineteenth century. In the development
of the city itself, the gridiron plan was added
to the list of labor-saving devices. Although the
gridiron plan had the same relation to natural conditions
and fundamental social needs as a paper
constitution has to the living customs of a people,
the simplicity of the gridiron plan won the heart of
the pioneer. Its rectangular blocks formed parcels
of land which he could sell by the front foot and
gamble with as easily as if he were playing cards,
and deeds of transfer could be drawn up hastily
with the same formula for each plot; moreover, the
least competent surveyor, without thought or knowledge,
could project the growth of New Eden’s streets
and avenues into an interminable future. In nineteenth-century
city planning the engineer was the
willing servant of the land monopolist; and he provided
a frame for the architect—a frame in which
we still struggle today—where site-value counted for
everything, and sight-value was not even an afterthought.</p>
<p>In street layout and land subdivision no attention
was paid to the final use to which the land would be
put; but the most meticulous efforts were made to<span class="pagenum">[86]</span>
safeguard its immediate use, namely, land-speculation.
In order to further this use hills were graded,
swamps and ponds filled, and streets laid out before
these expenditures could be borne by the people
who, in the end, were to profit by or suffer from
them. It was no wonder that the newer towns like
Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Chicago by the middle
of the century had forfeited to the gambler in real
estate, to pay the cost of street improvements, generous
tracts of land which the original planners had
set aside as civic centers. Planned by men who still
retained some of the civic vision of the early republic,
the commercial city speedily drifted into the
hands of people who had no more civic scruples than
the keeper of a lottery.</p>
<p>The gridiron plan had one other defect which
was accounted a virtue by the pioneer, and still is
shared by those who have not profited by the intervening
century’s experience. With its avenues that
encompassed swamps and wildernesses, with its
future growth forecast for at least a hundred years,
the complete city plan captivated the imagination.
Scarcely any American town was so mean that it
did not attempt to grow faster than its neighbor,
faster perhaps than New York. Only by the accumulation<span class="pagenum">[87]</span>
of more and more people could its colossal
city plan and its inflated land values be realized. If
the older cities of the seaboard were limited in their
attempts to become metropolises by the fact that
their downtown sections were originally laid out for
villages, the villages of the middle west labored under
just the opposite handicap; they had frequently acquired
the framework of a metropolis before they
had passed out of the physical state of a village.
The gridiron plan was a sort of hand-me-down which
the juvenile city was supposed to grow into and fill.
That a city had any other purpose than to attract
trade, to increase land values, and to grow is something
that, if it uneasily entered the mind of an
occasional Whitman, never exercised any hold upon
the minds of the majority of our countrymen. For
them, the place where the great city stands <em>is</em> the
place of stretched wharves, and markets, and ships
bringing goods from the ends of the earth; that,
and nothing else.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>With business booming and vanishing, with people
coming and going, with land continually changing<span class="pagenum">[88]</span>
hands, what encouragement was there for the stable
achievements of architecture? In vain does the
architect antic and grimace to conceal his despair;
his business is to put on a front. If he is not a
Pecksniff at heart, he will at any rate have to serve
Mr. Veneering. A guide book of 1826 refers to a
Masonic Hall “somewhat in the Gothic style”; and
we can characterize all the buildings of the period
by saying that they were “somewhat” like architecture—a
little more than scenery, a little less than
solids.</p>
<p>For a while it seemed as if the Gothic revival
might give the prevailing cast to nineteenth-century
building; for if this mode was adopted at first
because it was picturesque and historic it was later
reënforced by the conviction that it was a natural
and scientific mode of construction, that it stood
for growth and function, as against the arbitrary
character of the classic work. The symbols of the
organic world were rife in the thought of this period,
for in the sphere of thought biology was supplanting
physics, and Gothic architecture was supposed peculiarly
to be in the line of growth, while that of the
Renaissance cut across and, heretically, denied the
principle of organic development. Unfortunately<span class="pagenum">[89]</span>
the process of disintegration had gone so far that no
one current of thought had the power to dominate;
and the Gothic style proved to be only the first of a
number of discordant influences, derived from industry,
from history, from archæology.</p>
<p>Indeed, the chief sign that bears witness to the
disintegration of architecture during the formative
days of the pioneer is eclecticism; but there is still
another—the attempt to justify the industrial
process by using solely the materials it had created
in abundance. In discussing the plans for the
Smithsonian Institution, Robert Dale Owen observed
that “of late years a rival material, from
the mine, seems encroaching on these [stone, clay,
wood] and the next generation may see, arising on
our continent, villages, or it may be cities, of
iron.”</p>
<p>What Owen’s generation actually did see, apart
from sheet-iron façades and zinc cornices, was the
Crystal Palace, which was built in New York in
1853 in imitation of London’s exhibition hall of
1850. Ruskin described the original Crystal Palace,
with sardonic justice, as a magnified conservatory;
and that is about all that can be said for either
building. As exercises in technique they doubtless<span class="pagenum">[90]</span>
taught many lessons to the iron masters and engineers;
but they had scarcely anything to contribute
to architecture. A later generation built
the train sheds for their smoky railways on this pattern;
but the precedent lingers today chiefly in
subway kiosks and window-fronts, and even here it
has created no fresh forms for itself—unless the
blank expanse of a plate-glass window framed in
metallic grilles can be called a fresh form.</p>
<p>The growth of eclecticism, on the other hand, had
by the middle of the century given the American city
the aspect of a museum and the American countryside
a touch of the picture-book. Washington
Irving’s Sunnyside and the first Smithsonian building
were in the predominant Gothic mode; but Poe
described the mansion of a not altogether imaginary
Arnheim as semi-Gothic, semi-Saracenic; and the old
Tombs prison in New York got its name from the
Egyptian character of its façade. Who can doubt
that the design for a <em>Byzantine</em> cottage, shown in
The American Cottage Builder (1854), was somewhere
carried out?</p>
<p>Nettled by the criticism that America was not
Europe, the pioneer determined to bring Europe
to his doors. Relatively few American architects<span class="pagenum">[91]</span>
during the period, however, had been abroad, and
still fewer had been there to any purpose; even men
of culture and imagination like Hawthorne and Emerson
were not at home in the physical environment of
Europe, however intimate they were with its mind.
The buildings that were erected under the inspiration
of European tours only accentuated the barbarism
of the American scene and the poverty of the architect’s
imagination.</p>
<p>A good part of our architecture today still exhibits
the parvenu’s uneasiness, and is by turns
French, Italian, or more or less obsolete English;
but we do not, perhaps, realize with what a difference;
for photography and archæological research
now make it possible to produce buildings which have
all the virtues of the original except originality,
whereas the earlier, illiterate development of foreign
examples, rehearsed in memory, resulted in a conglomerate
form which resembled nothing so much,
perhaps, as P. T. Barnum’s mermaid.</p>
<p>If the Crystal Palace represents the extreme of industrial
art, Colonel Colt’s Armsmear represents the
opposite—untutored romanticism. Armsmear was
built near Hartford, between 1855 and 1862. A
writer in the Art Journal for 1876 calls this mansion<span class="pagenum">[92]</span>
a “characteristic type of the unique.” It was a
“long, grand, impressive, contradictory, beautiful,
strange thing.... An Italian villa in stone, massive,
noble, refined, yet not carrying out any decided principles
of architecture, it is like the mind of its originator,
bold and unusual in its combinations....
There is no doubt it is a little Turkish among other
things, on one side it has domes, pinnacles, and light,
lavish ornamentation, such as Oriental taste delights
in.... Yet, although the villa is Italian and cosmopolitan,
the feeling is English. It is an English
home in its substantiality, its home-like and comfortable
aspects.”</p>
<p>It is, alas! impossible to illustrate in these pages
this remarkable specimen of American architecture;
but in a lecture on the Present and Future Prospects
of Chicago (1846), I have discovered its exact
literary equivalent, and it will sum up the crudity
and cultural wistfulness of the period perhaps better
than any overt description:</p>
<div class="blockquot">
<p>“I thank you [apologizes the lecturer] for the
patience you have manifested on this occasion, and
promise never more to offend in like manner, so long.
I have now, as Cowper observes—<span class="pagenum">[93]</span></p>
<div class="poetry-container1">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="indentquote0a">‘Roved for fruit,
</div><div class="indent0">Roved far, and gathered much....’
</div></div></div></div>
<p>“And can, I think with Scott, surely say that—</p>
<div class="poetry-container1">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="indentquote0a">‘To his promise just
</div><div class="indent0">Vich-Alpine has discharged his trust.’
</div></div></div></div>
<p>“I propose now, gentlemen, to leave you at Carlangtoghford,</p>
<div class="poetry-container1">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="indentquote0a">‘And thou must keep thee with thy sword.’
</div></div></div></div>
<p>“Let me say to you on this occasion, as Campbell
does on another:</p>
<div class="poetry-container1">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="indentquote0a">‘Wave, Munich! all your banners wave!
</div><div class="indent0">And charge with all your chivalry.’
</div></div></div></div>
<p>“And should you in the contest fall, remember with
old Homer—</p>
<div class="poetry-container1">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="indentquote0a">‘Such honours Ilion to her hero paid,
</div><div class="indent0">And peaceful slept the mighty Hector’s shade.’
</div></div></div></div>
<p>“Allow me now to close in one of Scott’s beautiful
strains:</p>
<div class="poetry-container1">
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="indentquote0a">‘Charge, Chester, charge! On, Stanley, on!
</div><div class="indent0">Were the last words of Marmion.’”
</div></div></div></div>
</div>
<p><em>That</em> was American architecture between 1820
and the Civil War—a collection of tags, thrown at
random against a building. Architectural forms
were brought together by a mere juxtaposition of<span class="pagenum">[94]</span>
materials, held in place by neither imagination nor
logic. There are a number of honorable exceptions
to this rule, for architects like Renwick, who designed
St. Patrick’s Cathedral, and Upjohn, who built Trinity
Church, had a more sincere understanding of the
conventional task; and by any standard of esthetic
decency the old Gothic building of New York University,
on Washington Square, was a far finer
structure than the bulky office building that has
taken its place. Nevertheless, this saving remnant
does not alter the character of the great mass of
work, any more than the occasionally excellent cast-iron
balconies, brought over from the London of the
Regency, alter the depressing character of the great
mass of domestic building. In elevation and interior
treatment, these ante-bellum buildings were
all what-nots. Souvenirs of architecture, their
forms dimly recall the monuments of the past without
in any sense taking their place.</p>
<p>To tell the truth, a pall had fallen over the industrial
city: contemporary writers in the ’forties
and ’fifties speak of the filth and smoke, and without
doubt the chocolate brownstone front was introduced
as a measure of protective coloration. In
this dingy environment, men turned to nature as a<span class="pagenum">[95]</span>
refuge against the soiled and bedraggled works of
man’s creation; and as the creeping factory and
railroad train removed Nature farther from their
doors, the park was introduced as a more convenient
means of escape. The congested capitals of Europe
had already learnt this lesson; traveled Americans,
like William Cullen Bryant, brought it home; and
Central Park, planned in 1853, was the first of the
great landscape parks to serve as a people’s pleasance.
Conceived in contrast to the deflowered landscape
and the muddled city, the park alone re-created
the traditions of civilization—of man naturalized,
and therefore at home, of nature humanized, and
therefore enriched. And even today our parks are
what our cities should be, and are not.</p>
<p>By 1860 the halcyon day of American civilization
was over; the spirit had lingered in letters and
scholarship, in the work of Parkman and Motley
and Emerson and Melville and Thoreau, but the sun
had already sunk below the horizon, and what seemed
a promise was in reality an afterglow. By the time
the Civil War came, architecture had recorded faithfully
the social transformation; it was sullen, grim,
gauche, unstable. While in almost every age architecture
has an independent value to the spirit, so<span class="pagenum">[96]</span>
that we can rejoice in Chartres or Winchester even
though we have abandoned the Roman faith, in the
early industrial period architecture is reduced to
a symptom. Romanticism had not restored the past,
nor had industrialism made the future more welcome.
Architecture wandered between two worlds, “one
dead, the other powerless to be born.”</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[99]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_FIVE">CHAPTER FIVE<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">THE DEFEAT OF ROMANTICISM</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>Between 1860 and 1890, some of the forces that
were latent in industrialism were realized in American
architecture. Where the first pioneers had fared
timidly, hampered by insufficient resources, the
generation that had been stimulated by war industries
and profiteering, by the discovery of petroleum
and natural gas, by the spanning of the American
continent and by cable communication with Europe,
rioted over its new-found wealth.</p>
<p>“The Song of the Broad-Ax” still faintly lingered
on the Pacific slopes; but the land pioneer was
rapidly giving way to the pioneer in industry; and
for perhaps the first time during the century, the
surplus of capital outran the immediate demand for
new plant and equipment. The Iron Age reached its
peak of achievement in a series of great bridges, beginning
with the Eads Bridge at St. Louis; and
romanticism made a last stand. It will pay us, perhaps,
to take one last look at the romantic effort,<span class="pagenum">[100]</span>
in order to see how impossible and hopeless was the
task it set out to perform.</p>
<p>In England, the romantic movement in architecture
had made the return to the Middle Ages a
definite symbol of social reform: in Ruskin’s mind
it was associated with the restoration of a medieval
type of polity, something like a reformed manor,
while with Morris it meant cutting loose from the
machine and returning to the meticulous handicraft
of the town-guilds. In America, the romantic movement
lacked these social and economic implications;
and while it is not unfair to say that the literary
expression of English romanticism was on the whole
much better than the architecture, in the proportion
that The Stones of Venice was better than the
Ashmolean Museum or the Albert Memorial, the
reverse is true on this side of the Atlantic.</p>
<p>Inarticulate as H. H. Richardson, the chief exponent
of American romanticism, was, it seemed for
a while as if he might breast the tide of mechanical
industry and create for a good part of the scene a
sense of stability and harmony which it had all too
plainly lacked. In relation to his age, however,
Richardson was in the biological sense a “sport”;
surrounded by jerry-builders, who had degraded the<span class="pagenum">[101]</span>
craft of building, and engineers who ignored it, he
was perhaps the last of the great medieval line of
master-masons.</p>
<p>Richardson began his career in America directly
after the Civil War. Almost the first of the new
generation of Americans to be trained by the Ecole
des Beaux Arts, he brought back to America none
of those atrocious adaptations of the French
Renaissance like the New York, Philadelphia, and
Boston Post Offices. On the contrary, he had come
under the influence of Viollet-le-Duc; and for about
ten years he struggled with incongruous forms and
materials in the anomalous manner known as Free
Gothic. The end of this period of experiment came
in 1872, when he received the commission for Trinity
Church in Boston; and although it was not until
ten years later that he saw any Romanesque buildings
other than in photographs—for he had not
traveled during his student-years in Paris—it was
in this sturdy mode that he cast his best work.
Richardson was not a decorator, but a builder: in
going back to Romanesque precedent, with its round
arches and massive stone members, he was following
out a dictum of Viollet-le-Duc’s: “only primitive
sources supply the energy for a long career.” Turning<span class="pagenum">[102]</span>
away from “applied Gothic,” Richardson started
to build from the bottom up. So far had the art of
masonry disappeared that in Trinity Church Richardson
sometimes introduced struts and girders without
any attempt to assimilate them in the composition;
but as far as any single man could absorb and
live with a vanished tradition, Richardson did.</p>
<p>The proof of Richardson’s genius as a builder lies
in the difference between the accepted drawings for
Trinity Church and the finished building. His ideas
altered with the progress of the work, and in almost
every case the building itself is a vast improvement
over the paper design. Moreover, in his capacity as
master-mason, Richardson trained an able corps of
craftsmen; and so pervasive was his influence that
one still finds on houses Richardson never saw, the
touches of delicate, leafy stone-carving he had introduced.
With carving and sculpture, the other arts
entered, and by his fine designs and exacting standards
of work, Richardson elevated the position of
the minor crafts, at the same time that he turned
over unreservedly to men like John La Farge and
Augustus St. Gaudens the major elements of decoration.</p>
<p>Probably most people who know Richardson’s<span class="pagenum">[103]</span>
name vaguely associate him with ecclesiastical work;
but Richardson’s brand of romanticism was a genuine
attempt to embrace the age, and in his long
list of public works there are but five churches. If
the Pittsburgh Court House and Trinity Church
stand out as the hugest of his architectural conceptions,
it is the smaller buildings that test the skill
and imagination of the master, and the public
libraries at North Easton, Malden, and Quincy,
Mass., and some of the little railway stations in
Massachusetts stand on an equally high level. Richardson
pitted his own single powers against the
barbarism of the Gilded Age; but, unlike his contemporaries
in England, he did not turn his back
upon the excellences of industrialism. “The things
I want most to design,” he said to his biographer,
“are a grain-elevator and the interior of a great
river-steamboat.”</p>
<p>In short, Richardson sought to dominate his age.
So nearly did he succeed that in a symposium on
the ten finest buildings in America, conducted by an
architectural journal in the ’eighties, Richardson
was given five. This was no easy victory, and, to
tell the truth, it was only a partial one. The case
of the State Capitol at Albany, which Richardson<span class="pagenum">[104]</span>
and Eidlitz took in hand in 1878, after five million
dollars had been squandered on it in the course of
ten years’ misconstruction, scarcely caricatures the
conditions under which the arts struggled to exist.
Begun in the style of the Roman Renaissance, the
building under Richardson’s impetuous touch began
to take on Romanesque proportions, only to be legislated
back into Renaissance by the offended lawgivers!</p>
<p>William Morris Hunt, then at the height of
his powers, was commissioned to paint two large
mural compositions for the assembly chamber of
this blessed building. So much time had been spent
in mismanaging the structure that Hunt was given
only two months to transfer his cartouche to the
panels; but he worked heroically, and, as one of his
biographers says, the work was a great triumph.
Great, perhaps—but temporary! “The building
had fallen into the hands of a political ring, and
the poor construction was revealed in the leaking
of the massive roof and the settling of the whole
structure. Before ten years had passed, great portions
of Hunt’s paintings flaked off, and what remained
was walled up behind the rebuilding necessary
to avert utter ruin.” In a period like this,<span class="pagenum">[105]</span>
Richardson’s comparative success takes on heroic
proportions.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>With the little eddies of eclecticism, with the rage
for the Mansard roof, or the introduction of German
Gothic, and, a little later, the taste for Queen Anne
domesticity, there is scarcely any need to deal; they
represented only the dispersion of taste and the collapse
of judgment which marked the Gilded Age.</p>
<p>Up to the time of the Chicago World’s Fair,
Richardson had imitators, and they were not always
mean ones. L. H. Buffington, in Minneapolis, had to
his credit a number of buildings which would not,
perhaps, have dishonored the master himself; but,
as so often happens, the tags in Richardson’s work
were easier to imitate than his spirit and inventiveness;
and the chief marks of the style he created are
the all-too-solid courses of rough stone, the round
arch, the squat columns, and the contrasts in color
between the light granite and the dark sandstone or
serpentine. Mr. Montgomery Schuyler, an excellent
architectural critic, once said, not without reason,
that Richardson’s houses were not defensible except
in a military sense; but one is tempted to read<span class="pagenum">[106]</span>
into these ponderous forms partly the architect’s
unconscious desire to combat the infirmity and jerry-building
of his lower contemporaries, and partly his
patron’s anxiety to have a seat of refuge against the
uneasy proletariat. A new feudalism was entrenching
itself behind the stockades of Homestead and
the other steel-towns of the Pittsburgh district.
Here was a mode of building, solid, formidable, at
times almost brutal, that served the esthetic needs
of the barons of coal and steel almost as well as
the classic met those heroes who had survived the
War of Independence.</p>
<p>I have emphasized what was strong and fine in
Richardson’s work in order to show how free it was
from the minor faults of romanticism; and yet it
reckoned without its host, and Richardson, alas!
left scarcely a trace upon the period that followed.
Romanticism was welcomed when it built churches;
tolerated when it built libraries; petted when it built
fine houses; but it could not go much farther.
Richardson was a mason, and masonry was being
driven out by steel; he was an original artist, and
original art was being thrust into the background by
connoisseurship and collection; he was a builder, and
architecture was committing itself more and more<span class="pagenum">[107]</span>
to the paper plan; he insisted upon building foursquare,
and building was doomed more and more to
<em>façaderie</em>. The very strength of Richardson’s buildings
was a fatal weakness in the growing centers of
commerce and industry. It takes more than a little
audacity to tear down one of Richardson’s monuments,
and so, rather ironically, they have held their
own against the insurrections of traffic and realty
speculation; but the difficulty of getting rid of these
Romanesque structures only increased the demand
for a more frail and facile method of construction.</p>
<p>Romanticism met its great defeat in the office-building.
By the use of the passenger elevator, first
designed for an exhibition-tower adjacent to the
Crystal Palace in 1853, it had become possible to
raise the height of buildings to seven stories: the
desire for ground-rents presently increased the
height to ten. Beyond this, mere masonry could
not go without thickening the supporting piers to
such an extent that on a twenty-foot lot more than
a quarter of the width would be lost on the lower
floors. Richardson’s Marshall Field Building in
Chicago was seven stories high; and that was about
as far as solid stone or brick could climb without<span class="pagenum">[108]</span>
becoming undignified and futile by its bulk. The
possibilities of masonry and the possibilities of commercial
gain through ground-rents were at loggerheads,
and by 1888 masonry was defeated.</p>
<p>Richardson, fortunately, did not live to see the
undermining of the tradition he had founded and
almost established. Within a decade of his death,
however, only the empty forms of architecture remained,
for the steel-cage of the engineer had become
the new structural reality. By 1890 the
ground-landlord had discovered, in the language of
the pioneer’s favorite game, that “the roof’s the
limit.” If that was so, why limit the roof? With
this canny perception the skyscraper sprang into
being.</p>
<p>During this Gilded Age the standard of the best
building had risen almost as high as it had been in
America in any earlier period; but the mass of good
building had relatively decreased; and the domestic
dwellings in both city and country lost those final
touches of craftsmanship that had lingered, here
and there, up to the Civil War. In the awkward
country villas that began to fill the still-remote
suburbs of the larger cities, all sense of style and
proportion were lost: the plan was marked by meaningless<span class="pagenum">[109]</span>
irregularities; a dingy, muddy color spread
over the wooden façades. There exists a huge and
beautifully printed volume, of which, I believe, there
are not more than a hundred copies, on the villas
of Newport in 1876: the compiler thereof sought
to satisfy the vanity of the original owners and
the curiosity of a later generation; yet mid all these
examples of the “novel” and the “unique,” there is
not a single mansion that would satisfy any conceivable
line of descendants.</p>
<p>If the level of architecture was low in the country,
it touched the bottom of the abyss in the city.
As early as 1835 the multiple-family tenement had
been introduced in New York as a means of producing
congestion, raising the ground-rents, and
satisfying in the worst possible way the need of the
new immigrants for housing. The conditions of life
in these tenements were infinitely lower than they
had been in the most primitive farmhouse of the
colonial period; their lack of light, lack of water,
lack of sanitary facilities, and lack of privacy,
created an admirable milieu for the propagation
of vice and disease, and their existence in a period
which was boasting loudly of the advance of science
and industrialism shows, to say the least, how the<span class="pagenum">[110]</span>
myths which inspired the age stood between the eye
and reality, and obscured the actual state of the
modern industrial community.</p>
<p>To the disgrace of the architectural profession
in America, the worst features of tenement-house
construction were standardized in the so-called
dumb-bell tenement which won the first prize in the
model tenement-house competition of 1879; and the
tenements which were designed after this pattern
in the succeeding years combined a maximum lack
of privacy with a minimum of light and air. The
gridiron street-design, the narrow frontage, the deep
lot, all conspired to make good housing difficult in
the larger cities: within this framework good house-design,
indeed, still is difficult. The dumb-bell tenement
of the Gilded Age, however, raised bad housing
into an art; and the acquisition of this art
in its later developments is now one of the stigmata
of “progress” in a modern American city. I
say this without irony; the matter is too grave for
jest.</p>
<p>During these same ’seventies, the benefits of poor
housing were extended in New York to those with
money enough to afford something better: the Paris
flat was introduced. The legitimate excuse for the<span class="pagenum">[111]</span>
small apartment was the difficulty of obtaining
household service, and the futility of keeping up
large houses for small families: this, however, had
nothing to do with the actual form that the apartment
took, for, apart from the desire for congestion-rents,
it is as easy to build apartments for two
families as for twenty. The flat is a genuine convenience
for the well-to-do visitor to a city; it gives
him the atmosphere of a home without many of its
major complications, and those who got the taste for
this life in Paris were not altogether absurd in desiring
to enjoy the same benefits in New York. Unfortunately,
what suits a visitor does not necessarily
meet the demands of a permanent resident: one may
tolerate a blank wall for a week or a month without
being depressed, particularly since a good part of
a visitor’s time is spent outside his home; but to live
year after year facing a blank wall or an equally-frowning
façade opposite is to be condemned to the
environment of a penitentiary.</p>
<p>The result of building apartments in New York
and elsewhere was not cheaper rents for smaller
quarters: it was smaller quarters without the cheap
rents. Those who wanted sunlight and a pleasant
view paid a premium for it; those who did not get<span class="pagenum">[112]</span>
either paid more than enough for what they got.
The result of building apartments which would
satisfy only a visitor was to make every family
visitors: before the acute housing shortage, yearly
removals to new premises were the only palliative
that made their occupancy tolerable. The amount
of wear and tear and waste, the loss of energy and
money and good spirits, produced by the inability
of the architect to design adequately under the
pecuniary standards of the Gilded Age was colossal.
The urban nomad in his own way was as great a
spendthrift as the pioneer of the prairie. Both of
them had been unable to create a permanent civilization;
and both of them paid the price for it.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>During the first period of pioneering, mechanical
improvements had affected the milieu of architecture,
but not architecture itself, if one overlooks such ingenuities
as the circular and octagon houses of the
eighteen-thirties. Slowly, the actual methods of
construction changed: the carpenter-builder, who had
once performed every operation, gave way to the
joiner, whose work profited by putty and paint,<span class="pagenum">[113]</span>
curtains and carpets—to the plasterer, who covered
up the raw imperfect frame—and to the plumber.
Weird ornamental forms for doors and window-architraves,
for moldings and pendants, were supplied
to the builder by the catalogs of the planing
and scroll-saw mills. Invention produced novelties
of contortion in wood, unique in ugliness and imbecile
in design. Like the zinc and iron statues that
graced the buildings of the Centennial Exposition,
these devices record the absorption of art in a vain
technology.</p>
<p>One need not dwell upon the results of all these
miserable efforts, conceived in haste and aborted for
profit: the phenomenon was common to industrial
civilization at this period, and can be observed in
Battersea and Manchester as well as in New York and
Pittsburgh. Mr. Thomas Hardy, who was trained
as an architect, wrote the esthetic apology for industrialism;
and in proclaiming the rightness of our
architectural deserts, one cannot help thinking that
he transferred to the Wessex countryside a little of
the horrible depression he must have acquired in
London.</p>
<p>“Gay prospects,” exclaimed Mr. Hardy, “wed
happily with gay times; but, alas! if the times be<span class="pagenum">[114]</span>
not gay! Men have more often suffered from the
mockery of a place too smiling than from the oppression
of surroundings oversadly tinged....
Indeed, it is a question if the exclusive reign of orthodox
beauty is not approaching its last quarter. The
new vale in Tempe may be a gaunt waste in Thule:
human souls may find themselves in closer harmony
with external things wearing a somberness distasteful
to our race when it was young. Shall we say
that man has grown so accustomed to his spiritual
Bastille that he no longer looks forward to, and
even shrinks from, a casual emergence into unusual
brightness?”</p>
<p>Even the best work of the period is blighted with
this sombreness: the fact that so many of Richardson’s
buildings have the heavy air of a prison shows
us that the Gilded Age was not, indeed, gay, and
that a spiritual Black Friday perpetually threatened
the calendar of its days.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>If the romantic movement in America proved that
the architect could capture only a small part of the
field, and go no further than the interests of privilege<span class="pagenum">[115]</span>
allowed, the building of the Brooklyn Bridge
showed how well industrialism could handle its problems
when its purposes were not limited by the necessity
for sloppy workmanship and quick turnover.
The story of its building is a tribute to both science
and humanity. When John Roebling, the designer
of the bridge, died in the midst of his job, the business
of construction was taken up by his son, and
by his devotion to his task in season and out of
season, Washington Roebling became an invalid.
Confined to his house on Columbia Heights, for ten
years the younger Roebling watched the work
through a telescope, and directed it as a general
would direct a battle. So goes the legend: it runs
rather higher than the tales of mean prudence or
mechanical skill which glorified Mr. Samuel Smiles’
heroes.</p>
<p>The bridge itself was a testimony to the swift
progress of physical science. The strong lines of
the bridge, and the beautiful curve described by its
suspended cables, were derived from an elegant formula
in mathematical physics—the elastic curve.
If the architectural elements of the massive piers
have perhaps too much the bare quality of engineering,
if the pointed arches meet esthetic betrayal in<span class="pagenum">[116]</span>
the flat solidity of the cornices, if, in short, the
masonry does not sing as Richardson alone perhaps
could have made it sing, the steel work itself makes
up for this, by the architectural beauty of its pattern;
so that beyond any other aspect of New York,
I think, the Brooklyn Bridge has been a source of
joy and inspiration to the artist. In the later
bridges the spanning members are sturdier and the
supporting piers and cables are lighter and less
essential; and they suffer esthetically by the very
ease of their triumph over the difficulties of engineering.</p>
<p>All that the age had just cause for pride in—its
advances in science, its skill in handling iron, its
personal heroism in the face of dangerous industrial
processes, its willingness to attempt the untried and
the impossible—came to a head in the Brooklyn
Bridge. What was grotesque and barbarous in industrialism
was sloughed off in the great bridges.
These avenues of communication are, paradoxically,
the only enduring monuments that witness a period
of uneasy industrial transition; and to this day they
communicate a feeling of dignity, stability, and
unwavering poise.</p>
<p>The Brooklyn Bridge was opened in 1884; Richardson<span class="pagenum">[117]</span>
died, after finishing the Pittsburgh Court
House, in 1886. There was a short period during
which the echoes of Richardson’s style resounded in
the work of the Western architects; and then in
New York two of Richardson’s own pupils, Messrs.
McKim and White, who had caught the spirit of the
period that was to follow the passing of the frontier,
prepared an appropriate mold for its activities. By
far the finest things in the late ’eighties are the
shingled houses which Richardson and Stanford
White and a few others developed for seaboard estates:
they recovered the spirit of the early vernacular
work, and continued the colonial tradition without
even faintly recalling colonial forms. This
new note, however, was scarcely sounded before it
died out; and in the twenty years that followed the
conflict between industrialism and romanticism was
swallowed up and finally forgotten in the rise of a
new mode. Richardson had not died too soon. The
quality of mind and culture which shines through his
work was opposed to nearly every manifestation of
the period that succeeded him.</p>
<p>From this time on, romanticism retained a place
for itself only by forfeiting its claims to occupy the
whole province of architecture. In churches and<span class="pagenum">[118]</span>
college halls where the traditional tie with the Middle
Ages had never perhaps been completely broken, its
triumphs have been genuine; but although Mr. J. G.
Rogers’ Harkness Memorial at Yale, or Messrs.
Goodhue and Cram’s St. Thomas’ Church, for example,
leave little to be desired in themselves, they
have established no precedent for the hundred other
kinds of building which the modern community requires;
and it is not without significance that in his
most recent efforts Mr. Goodhue, for one, had abandoned
the molds of romanticism. Unlike Richardson,
the surviving romanticists now demand a certain
insulation from the modern world; the more intelligent
exponents of the movement believe with Dr.
Ralph Adams Cram that there is no hope for its
achievement throughout the community without a
return to “Walled Towns.”</p>
<p>Such a retreat is the equivalent of surrender. To
hold to Gothic precedent in the hope of re-creating
the medieval community is to hope that an ancient
bottle will turn potassium permanganate into claret.
The romanticists have never fully faced the social
and economic problems that attend their architectural
solutions: the result is that they have been
dependent upon assistance from the very forces and<span class="pagenum">[119]</span>
institutions which, fundamentally, they aim to combat.
Isolated on little islands, secure for the moment,
romanticism must view the work on the mainland
with a gesture of irate despair; and the only future
it dares to face lies behind it!</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[123]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_SIX">CHAPTER SIX<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">THE IMPERIAL FAÇADE</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>The decade between 1890 and 1900 saw the rise
of a new period in American architecture. This
period had, it is true, been dimly foreshadowed by
the grandiose L’Enfant, but if the superficial forms
resembled those of the early republic, and if the
precedents of classic architecture again became a
guide, the dawning age was neither a revival nor a
continuation.</p>
<p>In the meanwhile, fresh influences had entered.
The generation of students who had studied in
the Ecole des Beaux Arts after the Civil War was
ready, at last, to follow the lone trail which Richard
H. Hunt had blazed. Richardson’s most intimate
disciples reacted against the stamp of his personality
and sought a more neutral mode of expression,
consecrated by established canons of good taste. On
top of this, the introduction of steel-cage construction
removed the necessity for solid masonry, and
placed a premium upon the mask. The stage was
set for a new act of the drama.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[124]</span></p>
<p>All these influences shaped the style of our architecture
when it arose; but the condition that gave
it a substantial base was the rise of a new order in
America’s economic life. Up to this time, the chief
industrial problem had been to improve the processes
of mechanical production and to stake out new areas
for exploitation. One may compare these economic
advances to the separate sorties of an army operating
on a wide front: any lone adventurer might take
his courage in his hands and exploit an invention, or
sink an oil well, if he could find it. By 1890 the
frontier had closed; the major resources of the
country were under the control of the monopolist; it
became more important to consolidate gains than
freshly to achieve them. Separate lines of railroads
were welded into systems; separate steel plants
and oil plants were wrought into trusts; and where
monopoly did not rest upon a foundation of natural
advantage, the “gentleman’s agreement” began its
service as a useful substitute. The popular movements
which sought to challenge the forces of this
new regime—the labor movement, socialism, populism—had
neither analyzed the situation with sufficient
care nor attracted the adherence of the majority.
The defeat of Henry George as a local<span class="pagenum">[125]</span>
political candidate was symbolic: by 1888 a humane
thinker like Edward Bellamy had already accepted
the defeat, had embraced the idea of the trust, and
had conceived a comprehensive utopia on the basis of
letting the process of monopoly go the limit, so that
finally, by a mere yank of the levers, the vast economic
organizations of the country would become
the “property” of the people.</p>
<p>The drift to the open lands came to a full pause.
The land-empire had been conquered, and its overlords
were waxing in power and riches: the name
“millionaire” became the patent of America’s new
nobility. With the shift from industry to finance
went a shift from the producing towns to the spending
towns: architecture came to dwell in the stock
exchanges, the banks, the shops, and the clubs of the
metropolis; if it sought the countryside at all, it
established itself in the villas that were newly laid
out on hill and shore in the neighborhood of the
great cities. The keys to this period are opulence
and magnitude: “money to burn.”</p>
<p>These years witnessed what the Roman historian,
Ferrero, has called a “<i lang="fr">véritable recommencement
d’histoire</i>.” In the new centers of privilege there
arose a scale of living and a mode of architecture<span class="pagenum">[126]</span>
which, with all its attendant miseries, depletions, and
exploitations, recalled the Rome of the first and
second centuries after Christ. It is needless to say
that vast acres of buildings, factories, shops, homes,
were erected which had no relation at all to the imperial
regime; for not everyone participated in
either the benefits or the depressions that attended
the growth of monopoly; but the accent of this
period, the dominant note, was an imperial one.
While the commonplace building of the time cannot
be ignored, it remains, so to say, out of the picture.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>Hardly had the process of concentration and consolidation
begun before the proper form manifested
itself. The occasion for its appearance was the
World’s Columbian Exposition, opened in 1893. In
creating this fair, the enterprise and capacity for
organization which the architects of Chicago had
applied to the construction of the skyscraper transformed
the unkempt wilderness of Jackson Park into
the Great White City in the space of two short years.
Here the architects of the country, particularly of
New York and Chicago, appeared for the first time<span class="pagenum">[127]</span>
as a united profession, or, to speak more accurately,
as a college. Led by the New Yorkers, who had
come more decisively under European influence, they
brought to this exposition the combination of skill
and taste in all the departments of the work that
had, two centuries earlier, created the magnificent
formalities of Versailles. There was unity of plan
in the grouping of the main buildings about the
lagoon; there was unity of tone and color in the
gleaming white façades; there was unity of effect
in the use of classic orders and classic forms of
decoration. Lacking any genuine unity of ideas
and purposes—for Root had initially conceived of
a variegated oriental setting—the architects of the
exposition had achieved the effects of unity by
subordinating their work to an established precedent.
They chanted a Roman litany above the
Babel of individual styles. It was a capital triumph
of the academic imagination. If these main buildings
were architecture, America had never seen so
much of it at one time before. Even that belated
Greco-Puritan, Mr. Charles Eliot Norton, was warm
in praise.</p>
<p>It would be foolish to quarrel with the style that
was chosen for these exposition buildings, or to<span class="pagenum">[128]</span>
deny its propriety. Messrs. McKim, White, Hunt,
and Burnham divined that they were fated to serve
Renaissance despots and emperors with more than
Roman power, and unerringly they chose the proper
form for their activities. Whereas Rome had cast
its spell over the architects of the early Renaissance
because they wished once more to enter into its life,
the life of its sages and poets and artists, it attracted
the architects of the White City because of
its external features—because of its stereotyped
canons and rules—because of the relatively small
number of choices it offered for a lapse in taste—because
of its skill in conspicuous waste, and because
of that very noncommittal quality in its
massive forms which permitted the basilica to become
a church, or the temple to become a modern
bank.</p>
<p>Of all the Renaissance architects, their impulses
and interests were nearest, perhaps, to Robert Adam,
whose church at West Wycombe could be turned into
a ballroom by the simple act of removing the pews,
and permitting the gay walls and decorations to
speak for themselves. Behind the white staff façade
of the World’s Fair buildings was the steel and glass
structure of the engineer: the building spoke one<span class="pagenum">[129]</span>
language and the “architecture” another. If the
coming of the skyscraper had turned masonry into
veneer, here was a mode of architecture which was
little but veneer.</p>
<p>In their place, at the Fair, these classic buildings
were all that could be demanded: Mr. Geoffrey
Scott’s defense of the Baroque, in The Architecture
of Humanism, applies particularly to its essential
manifestations in the Garden and the Theater—and
why not in the Fair? Form and function, ornament
and design, have no inherent relation, one with the
other, when the mood of the architect is merely
playful: there is no use in discussing the anatomy of
architecture when its only aim is fancy dress. As a
mask, as a caprice, the classic orders are as justifiable
as the icing on a birthday cake: they divert
the eye without damaging the structure that they
conceal. Unfortunately, the architecture of the
Renaissance has a tendency to imitate the haughty
queen who advised the commons to eat cake. Logically,
it demands that a Wall Street clerk shall live
like a Lombardy prince, that a factory should be
subordinated to esthetic contemplation; and since
these things are impossible, it permits “mere building”
to become illiterate and vulgar below the standards<span class="pagenum">[130]</span>
of the most debased vernacular. Correct in
proportion, elegant in detail, courteous in relation
to each other, the buildings of the World’s Fair were,
nevertheless, only the simulacra of a living architecture:
they were the concentrated expression of an
age which sought to produce “values” rather than
goods. In comparison with this new style, the romanticism
of the Victorian Age, with its avid respect for
the medieval building traditions, was honesty and
dignity itself.</p>
<p>The Roman precedent, modified by the work of
Louis XIV and Napoleon III, by Le Nôtre and
Haussmann, formed the basis not merely for the
World’s Fair, but for the host of city plans that
were produced in the two decades that followed. It
seemed for a while as if the architect might take the
place of the engineer as city planner, and that the
mangled regularity of the engineer’s gridiron plan,
laid down without respect to topographic advantage
or to use, might be definitely supplanted in the remodeled
central districts and in the new extensions
and suburbs of the American city. The evil of the
World’s Fair triumph was that it suggested to the
civic enthusiast that every city might become a fair:
it introduced the notion of the City Beautiful as a<span class="pagenum">[131]</span>
sort of municipal cosmetic, and reduced the work
of the architect to that of putting a pleasing front
upon the scrappy building, upon the monotonous
streets and the mean houses, that characterized vast
areas in the newer and larger cities.</p>
<p>If the engineer who had devoted himself to sewers
and street-plans alone had been superficial, the architectural
city planner who centered attention upon
parkways alone, grand avenues alone, and squares
like the Place de l’Etoile alone, was equally superficial.
The civic center and the parkway represented
the better and more constructive side of this effort:
in Cleveland, in Pittsburgh, in Springfield, Mass.,
harmonious groups of white buildings raised their
heads above the tangle of commercial traffic, and in
the restoration of L’Enfant’s plan for Washington,
the realities of the imperial regime at length caught
up with the dreamer born out of his due time. A
good many of these plans, however, were pathetically
immature. One of the reports for Manhattan,
for example, devoted pages and pages to
showing the improvement that would follow the
demolition of the wall around Central Park—and
the importance of clipped trees in the design of
grand avenues!</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[132]</span></p>
<p>Plainly, the architect did not face with sufficient
realism the colossal task with which he was confronted
in the renovation of the city. He accepted
his improvements too much at the value placed
upon them by the leaders of Big Business—as a creator
of land-values, as an element in increasing the
commercial attractiveness of the city. Did not Mr.
Daniel Burnham himself point to the improvements
in Periclean Athens, not as the embodiment of
Athenian citizenship and religion at its highest
point, but as a measure for increasing the attractiveness
of the city to visitors from abroad? Cut
off from his true function to serve and beautify the
community, made an accessory of business itself, like
the merest salesman or advertising agent, it is no
wonder that the architect speedily lost his leadership;
and that the initiative went once again into
the hands of the engineer.</p>
<p>The main merit of all these efforts to perpetuate
the World’s Fair is that they sought to achieve
some of the dignity and decisiveness of the formal
plan. Their weakness was that they neglected new
elements, like the billboard, the skysign, the subway,
the tall building, which undermined the effects of
the plan even when it was achieved. In their efforts<span class="pagenum">[133]</span>
to escape from the welter of misguided commercial
enterprise, the advocates of the city beautiful placed
too great reliance upon spots of outward order and
decency; they took refuge in the paper symmetry of
axial avenues and round-points, as one finds them
in Haussmann’s Paris, and neglected the deeper
and more genuine beauties of, let us say, the
High Street in Oxford or Chipping Camden, or
of many another European town that had achieved
completion in its essentials before the nineteenth
century.</p>
<p>In short, the advocates of the city beautiful
sought a remedy on paper which could be purchased
only by a thorough reorganization of the community’s
life. If all this applies to the better side of the
World’s Fair, it touches even more emphatically
the worse.</p>
<p>The twenty years between 1890 and 1910 saw the
complete rehabilitation of the Roman mode, as the
very cloak and costume of imperial enterprise. The
main effort of architecture was to give an effect of
dignity and permanence to the façades of the principal
thoroughfares: the public buildings must dominate
the compositions, numerous boulevards and
avenues must concentrate the traffic at certain points<span class="pagenum">[134]</span>
and guide the stranger to the markets and amusements:
where possible, as in the Chicago plan,
by Messrs. Burnham and Bennett, avenues must
be cut through the gridiron pattern of blocks in
order to achieve these effects. If this imperial
street system is somewhat arbitrary, and if the necessary
work of grading, filling, demolishing, and
purchasing existing property rights is extremely
costly, the end, nevertheless, justifies the means—the
architecture impresses and awes a populace
that shares vicariously in it glories. Should the
effect prove a little too austere and formidable, the
monuments will be offset with circuses and hippodromes.</p>
<p>In all this, the World’s Fair was a precise and
classic example, for it reproduced in miniature the
imperial order. When the panic of 1893 kept people
away from the exhibitions of art, industry, and culture,
sideshows were promptly introduced by the
astute organizers. Beyond the serene classic façades,
which recalled the elevation of a Marcus Aurelius,
sprawled the barkers, the freaks, and the tricksters,
whose gaudy booths might have reminded the spectator
of the other side of the imperial shield—the
gaminism of Petronius Arbiter. The transformation<span class="pagenum">[135]</span>
of these white façades into the Gay White Ways
came during the next decade; whilst the sideshows
achieved a separate existence as “Coney Island.” On
top of this came the development of the mildly gladiatorial
spectacles of football and baseball: at first
invented for playful exercise, they became a standard
means of exhibition by more or less professional performers.
The erection of numerous amphitheaters
and arenas, such as the Yale Bowl, the Harvard
Stadium, the Lewisohn Stadium, and their counterparts
in the West, rounded out the imperial spectacle.</p>
<p>By a happy congruence of forces, the large-scale
manufacture of Portland cement, and the reintroduction
of the Roman method of concrete construction,
came during the same period. Can anyone
contemplate this scene and still fancy that imperialism
was nothing more than a move for foreign
markets and territories of exploitation? On the
contrary, it was a tendency that expressed itself in
every department of Western civilization, and if it
appears most naked, perhaps, in America, that is
only because, as in the earlier periods, there was so
little here to stand in its way. Mr. Louis Sullivan
might well complain, in The Autobiography of an<span class="pagenum">[136]</span>
Idea, that imperialism stifled the more creative modes
of architecture which might have derived from our
fine achievements in science, from our tentative experiments
in democracy. It seems inevitable, however,
that the dominant fact in our civilization should
stamp the most important monuments and buildings
with its image. In justice to the great professors
of the classic style, Messrs. McKim and
Burnham and Carrere and Hastings, one must admit
that the age shaped them and chose them and used
them for its ends. Their mode of building was
almost unescapably determined by the milieu in
which they worked.</p>
<p>The change in the social scene which favored an
imperial setting was not without its effects upon
the industries that supplied the materials for architecture,
and upon the processes of building itself.
Financial concentration in the stone quarries, for
example, was abetted by the creation of a national
system of rail transportation, and partly, perhaps,
by the elaboration of the mechanical equipment for
cutting and trimming stone beyond a point where a
small plant could work economically. The result was
that during this period numerous small local quarries,
which had been called into existence by Richardson’s<span class="pagenum">[137]</span>
fine eye for color contrasts, were allowed to
lapse. Vermont marble and Indiana limestone served
better the traditions that had been created in the
White City.</p>
<p>The carrying of coals to Newcastle is always a
pathetic practice; it remained for the imperial age
to make it a subject for boasting. Just as many
Connecticut towns whose nearby fields are full of
excellent granite boulders, boast a bank or a library
of remote marble, so New York City, which has a
solid foundation of schist, gneiss, and limestone,
can point to only a handful of buildings, notably
the College of the City of New York and Mr. Goodhue’s
Church of the Intercession, in which these excellent
local materials were used. The curious result
of being able by means of railway transportation to
draw upon the ends of the earth for materials has
been, not variety, but monotony. Under the imperial
order the architect was forced to design
structures that were identical in style, treatment,
and material, though they were placed thousands of
miles apart and differed in every important function.
This ignorance of regional resources is not
incompatible with grand effects, or even on occasion
with decently good architecture. But it does not<span class="pagenum">[138]</span>
profit by that fine adaptation to site, that justness
of proportion in the size of window and slope
of roof, which is an earnest of the architect’s mastery
of the local situation. Substitute Manila for the
military colony of Timgad, or Los Angeles for
Alexandria, and it is plain that we have here another
aspect of Ferrero’s generalization. Even architects
whose place of work was nearer to the site of their
buildings were, nevertheless, compelled to copy the
style of the more successful practitioners in New
York and Chicago.</p>
<p>In government, in industry, in architecture, the imperial
age was one. The underlying policy of imperialism
is to exploit the life and resources of
separate regions for the benefit of the holders of
privilege in the capital city. Under this rule, all
roads lead literally to Rome. While, as the German
historian, W. H. Riehl, points out, the provincial
highroads served to bring the city out into the
countryside, the railroads served to bring the major
cities together and to drain the products of rural
regions into the metropolis. It was no accident that
the great triumphs of American architecture during
the imperial period were the railroad stations; particularly
the Pennsylvania and the Grand Central<span class="pagenum">[139]</span>
in New York, and the Union Station in Washington.
Nor is it by mere chance that the Washington and
the Pennsylvania stations are the monuments to
two architects, McKim and Burnham, who worshiped
most whole-heartedly at the imperial shrine.
With capital insight, these men established the
American Academy at Rome: they recognized their
home.</p>
<p>Esthetically considered, it is true, perhaps, that
the finest element in the Pennsylvania station is the
train hall, where the architect has dealt sincerely
with his steel elements and has not permitted himself
to cast a fond, retrospective eye upon the Roman
baths. When all allowances are made, however, there
remains less for criticism in the railway stations and
the stadiums—those genuinely Roman bequests—than
in any of the other imperial monuments. Indeed,
so well does Roman architecture lend itself to
the railroad station that one of the prime virtues of
such a building, namely ease of circulation, was even
communicated to the New York Public Library,
where it is nothing but a nuisance, since it both increases
the amount of noise and diminishes the
amount of space for reading rooms that are already
overcrowded.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[140]</span></p>
<p>Here, indeed, is the capital defect of an established
and formalized mode: it tends to make the
architect think of a new problem in terms of an old
solution for a different problem. Mr. Charles
McKim, for example, indignantly withdrew from the
competition over the New York Public Library because
the demands of the librarian for a convenient
and expeditious administration of his business interfered
with the full-blown conception which Mr. McKim
had in mind. All this happened after years of demonstration
in the Boston Library of Messrs. McKim
and White’s failure to meet that problem squarely;
and it apparently was not affected by Mr. McKim’s
experience with the great Columbia Library, which
has ample space for everything except books. In
short, the classic style served well enough only when
the building to be erected had some direct relation
to the needs and interests of the Roman world—the
concourse of idlers in the baths or the tiers of
spectators in the circuses and hippodromes. When
it came face to face with our own day, it had but
little to say, and it said that badly, as anyone who
will patiently examine the superimposed orders on
the American Telegraph Building in New York will
discover for himself.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[141]</span></p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>With the transition from republican to imperial
Rome, numerous monuments were erected to the
Divine Cæsar. Within a much shorter time than
marked the growth of the imperial tradition in
America, a similar edification of patriotic memories
took place.</p>
<p>In the restoration of the original plan of Washington,
which began in 1901, the axis of the plan
was so altered as to make it pass through the Washington
Monument; and at the same time the place
of the Lincoln Memorial, designed by the late Mr.
Henry Bacon, a pupil of Mr. McKim’s, was assigned.
This was the first of a whole series of temples devoted
to the national deities. In the Lincoln Memorial,
in the McKinley Memorial at Niles, Ohio, in
the Hall of Fame at New York University, and in
their prototype, Grant’s Tomb, one feels not the living
beauty of our American past, but the mortuary
air of archæology. The America that Lincoln was
bred in, the homespun and humane and humorous
America that he wished to preserve, has nothing in
common with the sedulously classic monument that
was erected to his memory. Who lives in that shrine,<span class="pagenum">[142]</span>
I wonder—Lincoln, or the men who conceived it: the
leader who beheld the mournful victory of the Civil
War, or the generation that took pleasure in the
mean triumph of the Spanish-American exploit, and
placed the imperial standard in the Philippines and
the Caribbean?</p>
<p>On the plane of private citizenship, a similar movement
took place: while before 1890 one can count
the tombs in our cemeteries that boast loudly of the
owner’s earthly possessions and power, from that
time onward the miniature temple-mausoleum becomes
more and more frequent. In fact, an entire history
of architecture could be deduced from our cemeteries;
all that has so far been described could be marked
in the progress from the simple slab, carved in
almost Attic purity with a weeping willow or a
cubistic cherub, that characterized the eighteenth
century, to the bad lettering and the more awkward
headstones of the early nineteenth century; and from
this to the introduction of polished granite and iron
ornament in the post-Civil War cemetery, down to
the mechanically perfect mausoleum, where the
corpses are packed like the occupants of a subway
train, that some of our more effusively progressive
communities boast of today. As we live, so we die:<span class="pagenum">[143]</span>
no wonder Shelley described Hell as a place much
like London.</p>
<p>The Roman development of New York, Chicago,
Washington, and the lesser metropolises, had an important
effect upon the homes of the people. Historically,
the imperial monument and the slum-tenement
go hand in hand. The same process that
creates an unearned increment for the landlords
who possess favored sites, contributes a generous
quota—which might be called the unearned excrement—of
depression, overcrowding, and bad living,
in the dormitory districts of the city. This had
happened in imperial Rome; it had happened again
in Paris under Napoleon III, where Haussmann’s
sweeping reconstructions created new slums in the
districts behind the grand avenues, quite as bad,
if far less obvious, as those that had been cleared
away; and it happened once again in our American
cities. Whereas in Rome a certain limit, however,
was placed upon the expansion of the city because of
the low development of vehicular traffic, the rise of
mechanical transportation placed no bounds at all
on the American city. If Rome was forced to create
huge engineering projects like aqueducts and sewers
in order to cleanse the inhabitants and remove the<span class="pagenum">[144]</span>
offal of its congested districts, the American city
followed the example of the modern Romes like London
and Paris by devising man-sewers, in which the
mass of plebeians could be daily drained back and
forth between their dormitories and their factories.</p>
<p>So far from relieving congestion, these colossal
pieces of engineering only made more of it possible:
by pouring more feeder lines into the central district
of New York, Boston, Chicago, or where you will,
rapid transit increased the housing congestion at
one end and the business-congestion at the other. As
for the primary sewer system devised for the imperial
metropolis, it could scarcely even claim, with rapid
transit, that it was a valuable commercial investment.
The water outlets of New York are so thoroughly
polluted that not merely have the shad and the
oyster beds vanished from the Hudson River, where
both once flourished, but it is a serious question
whether the tides can continue to transport their
vast load of sewage without a preliminary reduction
of its content. Like the extension of the water conduits
into the Adirondacks, all these necessary little
improvements add to the per capita cost of living in
an imperial metropolis, without providing a single<span class="pagenum">[145]</span>
benefit that a smaller city with no need for such
improvements does not enjoy. In the matter of public
parks, for example, the Committee on Congestion
in New York, in 1911, calculated that the park
space needed for the East Side alone, on the scale
provided by the city of Hartford, would be greater
than the entire area of Manhattan Island. In short,
even for its bare utilitarian requirements, the mass-city,
as the Germans call it, costs more and gives
less than communities which have not had imperial
greatness inflicted upon them.</p>
<p>As to the more positive improvements under the
imperial regime, history leaves no doubt as to their
dubious character, and current observation only reinforces
history’s lesson. In discussing the growth
of the tenement in Rome after the Great Fire, Friedlander
says:</p>
<p>“The motives for piling up storeys were as strong
as ever: the site for Cæsar’s Forum had cost over
£875,000 compensation to tenants and ground landlords.
Rome had loftier houses than modern capital.
A disproportionately large part of the area
available for building was monopolized by the few,
in consequence of the waste of space in the plethoric
architecture of the day, and a very considerable<span class="pagenum">[146]</span>
portion was swallowed up by the public places, such
as the imperial forums, which took up six hectares,
as well as by the traffic regulations and extensions
of the streets. The transformation and decoration
of Rome by the Cæsars enhanced the scarcity of
housing, as did Napoleon III’s improvements in
Paris. A further adjutory cause of the increase
in the price of dwellings was the habit of speculation
in house property (which Crassus had practiced in
great style) and the monopoly of the proprietors,
in consequence of which houses were let and sublet.”</p>
<p>It would be tedious to draw out the parallel: given
similar social conditions in America we have not been
able to escape the same social results, even down
to the fact that the palliatives of private philanthropy
flourish here again as they had not flourished
anywhere on the same scale since the Roman Empire.
So much for imperial greatness. When an
architect like Mr. Edward Bennett can say, as he
did in The Significance of the Fine Arts: “House the
people densely, if necessary, but conserve great areas
for recreation,” we need not be in doubt as to who
will profit by the density and who will profit, at the
other end, by the recreation. It is not merely that<span class="pagenum">[147]</span>
the park must be produced to remedy the congestion:
it is even more that the congestion must be produced
in order to provide for the park. To profit by both
the disease and the remedy is one of the master-strokes
of imperialist enterprise. Mr. Daniel Burnham
said of the World’s Fair, according to Mr.
Bennett and Mr. Charles Moore, “that it is what the
Romans would have wished to create in permanent
form.” One may say of our imperial cities that
they are what the Romans did create—but whether
the form will be permanent or not is a matter
we may leave to the sardonic attentions of history.</p>
<p>For my own part, I think we have at last acquired
a criterion which will enable us to sum up the architecture
of the imperial age, and deal justly with
these railroad stations and stadiums, these sewers
and circuses, these aqueducts and parkways and
grand avenues. Our imperial architecture is an
architecture of compensation: it provides grandiloquent
stones for people who have been deprived of
bread and sunlight and all that keeps man from
becoming vile. Behind the monumental façades of
our metropolises trudges a landless proletariat,
doomed to the servile routine of the factory system;<span class="pagenum">[148]</span>
and beyond the great cities lies a countryside whose
goods are drained away, whose children are uprooted
from the soil on the prospect of easy gain and endless
amusements, and whose remaining cultivators
are steadily drifting into the ranks of an abject
tenantry. This is not a casual observation: it is
the translation of the last three census reports into
plain English. Can one take the pretensions of this
architecture seriously; can one worry about its
esthetics or take full delight in such finer forms
as Mr. Pope’s Temple of the Scottish Rite in
Washington, or Mr. Bacon’s Lincoln Memorial?
Yes, perhaps—if one refuses to look beyond the
mask.</p>
<p>Even in some of its proudest buildings, the imperial
show wears thin; and one need not peer into
the slums beyond in order to realize its defects. The
rear of the Metropolitan Museum or the Brooklyn
Museum, for example, might be the rear of a row
of Bronx tenements or Long Island City factories, so
gaunt and barren and hideous is their aspect. If
the imperial age was foreshadowed in the World’s
Fair, it has received its apotheosis in the museum.
In contrast to the local museums one still finds occasionally
in Europe, which are little more than extensions<span class="pagenum">[149]</span>
of the local curio cabinet, the imperial museum
is essentially a loot-heap, a comprehensive
repository for plunder. The sage Viollet-le-Duc once
patly said that he preferred to see his apples hanging
on a tree, rather than arranged in rows in the
fruit shop: but the animus of the museum is to value
the plucked fruit more than the tree that bore
it.</p>
<p>Into the museum come the disjecta membra of other
lands, other cultures, other civilizations. All that
had once been a living faith and practice is here reduced
to a separate specimen, pattern, or form. For
the museum, the world of art has already been created:
the future is restricted to a duplication of the
perfected past. This animus is identic with that
which made the Romans so skillful in copying Greek
statues and so dull in carving their own; a desirable
habit of humility were it not for the fact that the
works of art in the past could not have been created
had our ancestors been so punctual in respect to
finished designs. The one thing the museum cannot
attempt to do is to supply a soil for living art: all
that it can present is a pattern for reproduction.
To the extent that an insincere or imitative art is
better than no art at all, the Imperial Age marked<span class="pagenum">[150]</span>
an advance: to the extent, however, that a living
art is a fresh gesture of the spirit, the museum confessed
all too plainly that the age had no fresh
gestures to make; on that score, it was a failure,
and the copying of period furniture and the design
of period architecture were the livid proofs of that
failure.</p>
<p>The museum is a manifestation of our curiosity,
our acquisitiveness, our essentially predatory culture;
and these qualities were copiously exhibited in
the architecture of imperialism. It would be foolish
to reproach the great run of architects for exploiting
the characteristics of their age; for even those
who in belief and design have remained outside the
age—such resolute advocates of a medieval polity as
Dr. Ralph Adams Cram—have not been able to divert
its currents. In so far as we have learned to care
more for empire than for a community of freemen,
living the good life, more for dominion over palm
and pine than for the humane discipline of ourselves,
the architect has but enshrined our desires. The
opulence, the waste of resources and energies, the
perversion of human effort represented in this architecture
are but the outcome of our general scheme
of working and living. Architecture, like government,<span class="pagenum">[151]</span>
is about as good as a community deserves.
The shell that we create for ourselves marks our
spiritual development as plainly as that of a snail
denotes its species. If sometimes architecture becomes
frozen music, we have ourselves to thank when
it is a pompous blare of meaningless sounds.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[155]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_SEVEN">CHAPTER SEVEN<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">THE AGE OF THE MACHINE</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>Since 1910 the momentum of the Imperial Age
seems to have slackened a little: at any rate, in architecture
it has lost much of the original energy which
had been given to it by the success of the Chicago
Exposition. It may be, as Henry Adams hinted,
that the rate of change in the modern world has
altered, so that processes which required centuries
for their consummation before the coming of the
dynamo have been accelerated into decades.</p>
<p>With events and buildings so close to us, it is
almost impossible to rate their relative importance;
all that I can do in the present chapter is to single
out one or two of the more important threads which,
it seems to me, are bound to give the predominant
color to the fabric of our architecture. It is fairly
easy to see, however, why the imperial order has
not stamped every aspect of our building: for one
thing, eclecticism has not merely persisted, but the
new familiarity that the American architect has
gained with authentic European and Asiatic work<span class="pagenum">[156]</span>
outside the province of the classic has increased the
range of eclecticism. So the baroque architecture of
Spain, which flourished so well in Mexico, and the
ecclesiastical architecture of Byzantium and Syria,
have added a new charm to our motlied wardrobe:
from the first came new lessons in ornament and
color, applied with great success by Mr. Bertram
Goodhue in the Panama-Pacific Exposition, and now
budding lustily in southern villas and gardens; and
from the second the architect is learning the importance
of mass and outline—the essentials in
monolithic construction.</p>
<p>Apart from this, however, the imperial regime has
been stalled by its own weight. The cost of cutting
through new streets, widening grand avenues, and
in general putting on a monumental front has put
the pure architect at a disadvantage: there is the
same disparity between his plans and the actual
aims of the commercial community as there is, quite
often, between the prospectus and the actual organization
of an industry. Within the precincts of
the modern city, the engineer, whose utilitarian eye
has never blinked at the necessity for profitable
enterprise, and whose interest in human beings as
loads, weights, stresses, or units pays no attention<span class="pagenum">[157]</span>
to their qualitative demands as human beings—within
these precincts, I say, the engineer has recovered his
supremacy.</p>
<p>Here, in fact, is the paradox of American architecture.
In our suburban houses we have frequently
achieved the excellence of Forest Hills and Bronxville;
in our public buildings we tend more easily to
approach the strength and originality of Mr. Goodhue’s
State Capitol for Nebraska; in fact, never before
have the individual achievements of American
architects been so rich, so varied, and so promising.
In that part of architecture which lies outside the
purlieus of our commercial system—I mean the
prosperous country homes and college buildings and
churches and municipal institutions—a tradition of
good building and tactful design has been established.
At this point, unfortunately, the scope of the architect
has become narrowed: the forces that create the
great majority of our buildings lie quite outside the
cultivated field in which he works. Through the
mechanical reorganization of the entire milieu, the
place of architecture has become restricted; and
even when architecture takes root in some unnoticed
crevice, it blooms only to be cut down at the first
“business opportunity.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[158]</span></p>
<p>The processes which are inimical to architecture
are, perhaps, seen at their worst in the business district
of the metropolis; but more and more they
tend to spread throughout the rest of the community.
Mr. Charles McKim, for example, was enthusiastic
over Mr. Burnham’s design for the Illinois Trust and
Savings Bank in Chicago, and predicted that it
would long be a monument to his genius. “But unfortunately,”
as Mr. Burnham’s biographer says,
“unfortunately for Mr. McKim’s reputation as a
prophet, he was unappreciative of the rapid growth
of Chicago, the consequent appreciation in the value
of real estate in the Loop district, and the expansive
force of a great bank. This beautiful building is
doomed to be replaced by one which will tower into
the air to the permissible height of structures in the
business section of Chicago.” The alternative to
this destruction is an even more ignominious state
of preservation; such a state as the Knickerbocker
Trust Company building achieved in New York,
or the old Customs House in Boston, both of which
have been smothered under irrelevant skyscrapers.
Even where economic necessity plays no distinct part,
the forms of business take precedence over the forms
of humanism—as in the Shipping Board’s York Village,<span class="pagenum">[159]</span>
where as soon as the direction of the community
planner was removed a hideous and illiterate
row of shop-fronts was erected, instead of that provided
by the architect, in spite of the fact that the
difference in cost was negligible.</p>
<p>Unfortunately for architecture, every district of
the modern city tends to become a business district,
in the sense that its development takes place less in
response to direct human needs than to the chances
and exigencies of sale. It is not merely business
buildings that are affected by the inherent instability
of enterprises to which profit and rent have become
Ideal Ends: the same thing is happening to the great
mass of houses and apartments which are designed
for sale. Scarcely any element in our architecture
and city planning is free from the encroachment,
direct or indirect, of business enterprise. The old
Boulevard in New York, for example, which was
laid out by the Tweed ring long before the land on
either side was used for anything but squatters’
farms, was almost totally disrupted by the building
of the first subways, and it has taken twenty years to
effect even a partial recovery. The widening of
part of Park Avenue by slicing off its central grass
plot has just been accomplished, in order to relieve<span class="pagenum">[160]</span>
traffic congestion; and it needs only a little time before
underground and overground traffic will cause
the gradual reduction of our other parkways—even
those which now seem secure.</p>
<p>The task of noting the manifold ways in which
our economic system has affected architecture would
require an essay by itself: it will be more pertinent
here, perhaps, to pay attention to the processes
through which our economic system has worked; and
in particular to gauge the results of introducing
mechanical methods of production, and mechanical
forms into provinces which were once wholly occupied
by handicraft. The chief influence in eliminating
the architect from the great bulk of our building
is the machine itself: in blotting out the elements of
personality and individual choice it has blotted out
the architect, who inherited these qualities from the
carpenter-builder. Mr. H. G. Wells, in The New
Macchiavelli, described Altiora and Oscar Bailey
as having the temperament that would cut down
trees and put sanitary glass lamp-shades in their
stead; and this animus has gone pretty far in both
building and city planning, for the reason that lamp-shades
may be manufactured quickly for sale, and
trees cannot. It is time, perhaps, that we isolated<span class="pagenum">[161]</span>
the machine and examined its workings. What is the
basis of our machine-ritual, and what place has it
in relation to the good life?</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>Before we discuss the influence of machinery upon
building, let us consider the building itself as an
architectural whole.</p>
<p>Up to the nineteenth century, a house might be
a shelter and a work of art. Once it was erected, it
had few internal functions to perform: its physiological
system, if we may use a crude and inaccurate
metaphor, was of the lowest order. An open fire
with a chimney, windows that opened and closed—these
were its most lively pretensions. Palladio, in
his little book on the Five Orders, actually has suggestions
for cooling the hot Italian villa by a system
of flues conducted into an underground chamber
from which cold air would circulate; but this ingenious
scheme was on the plane of Leonardo’s flying
machine—an imaginative anticipation, I suppose,
rather than a project.</p>
<p>With the exception of Wren’s suggestions for
ventilating the Houses of Parliament, and Sir<span class="pagenum">[162]</span>
Humphrey Davy’s actual installation of apparatus
for this purpose, it was not until the last quarter
of the nineteenth century that engineers turned their
minds to this problem, in America. Yankee ingenuity
had devised central heating before the Civil War, and
one of the first numbers of Harper’s Weekly contained
an article deploring the excessive warmth of
American interiors; and at one time or another during
the century, universal running water, open
plumbing, gas, electric lighting, drinking fountains,
and high speed electric elevators made their way
into the design of modern buildings. In Europe
these changes came reluctantly, because of the existence
of vast numbers of houses that had been
built without a mechanical equipment; so that many
a student at the Beaux Arts returned from an attic
in the Latin quarter where water was carried in
pails up to the seventh story, to design houses in
which the labor-saving devices became an essential
element in the plan. It is only now, however, during
the last two decades, that the full effect of these
innovations has been felt.</p>
<p>The economic outcome of all these changes can
be expressed mathematically; and it is significant.
According to an estimate by Mr. Henry Wright in<span class="pagenum">[163]</span>
the Journal of the American Institute of Architects,
the structure of the dwelling house represented over
ninety per cent of the cost in 1800. Throughout
the century there was a slow, steady increase in the
amount necessary for site, fixtures, and appliances,
until, in 1900, the curve takes a sharp upward rise;
with the result that in 1920 the cost of site and
mechanical equipment has risen to almost one-half
the total cost of the house. If these estimates apply
to the simple dwelling house, they apply, perhaps,
with even greater force to the tenement, the office
building, the factory, and the loft: here the cost of
ventilation, of fireproof construction, of fire-prevention
and fire-escaping devices, makes the engineering
equipment bulk even more heavily.</p>
<p>Whereas in the first stages of industrial development
the factory affected the environment of architecture,
in its latest state the factory has become the
environment. A modern building is an establishment
devoted to the manufacture of light, the circulation
of air, the maintenance of a uniform temperature,
and the vertical transportation of its occupants.
Judged by the standards of the laboratory, the
modern building is, alas! an imperfect machine: the
engineers of a certain public service corporation, for<span class="pagenum">[164]</span>
example, have discovered that the habit of punching
windows in the walls of the building-machine is responsible
for great leakages which make difficult the
heating and cooling of the plant; and they hold that
the maximum efficiency demands the elimination of
windows, the provision of “treated” air, and the
lighting of the building throughout the day by
electricity.</p>
<p>All this would perhaps seem a little fantastic, were
it not for the fact that we have step by step approached
the reality. Except for our old-fashioned
prejudice in favor of windows, which holds over from
a time when one could see a green field or a passing
neighbor by sitting at one, the transformation favored
by the engineers has already been accomplished.
Just because of the ease in installing fans, lights,
and radiators in a modern building, a good part of
the interiors of our skyscrapers are fed day and
night with artificial light and ventilation. The margin
of misuse under this method of construction is
necessarily great; the province of design, limited.
Instead of the architect’s paying attention to exposure,
natural circulation, and direct daylight, and
making a layout which will achieve these necessary
ends, he is forced to center his efforts on the maximum<span class="pagenum">[165]</span>
exploitation of land. Where the natural factors
are flouted or neglected, the engineer is always
ready to provide a mechanical substitute—“just as
good as the original” and much more expensive.</p>
<p>By systematically neglecting the simplest elements
of city planning, we have provided a large and
profitable field for all the palliative devices of engineering:
where we eliminate sunlight we introduce
electric light; where we congest business, we build skyscrapers;
where we overcrowd the thoroughfares with
traffic we burrow subways; where we permit the city
to become congested with a population whose density
would not be tolerated in a well-designed community,
we conduct water hundreds of miles by aqueducts
to bathe them and slake their thirst; where we rob
them of the faintest trace of vegetation or fresh air,
we build metalled roads which will take a small portion
of them, once a week, out into the countryside.
It is all a very profitable business for the companies
that supply light and rapid transit and motor cars,
and the rest of it; but the underlying population
pays for its improvements both ways—that is, it
stands the gratuitous loss, and it pays “through the
nose” for the remedy.</p>
<p>These mechanical improvements, these labyrinths<span class="pagenum">[166]</span>
of subways, these audacious towers, these endless
miles of asphalted streets, do not represent a triumph
of human effort: they stand for its comprehensive
misapplication. Where an inventive age follows
methods which have no relation to an intelligent
and humane existence, an imaginative one would not
be caught by the necessity. By turning our environment
over to the machine we have robbed the machine
of the one promise it held out—that of enabling
us to humanize more thoroughly the details of
our existence.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>To return to architecture. A further effect of the
machine process on the internal economy of the modern
building is that it lends itself to rapid production
and quick turnover. This has been very well
put by Mr. Bassett Jones, in an article in The American
Architect, which is either a hymn of praise to
the machine, or a cool parade of its defects, according
to the position one may take.</p>
<p>“As the building more and more takes on the character
of the machine,” says Mr. Jones, “so does its
design, construction, and operation become subject
to the same rules that govern ... a locomotive.<span class="pagenum">[167]</span>
Our grandfathers built for succeeding generations.
The rate of development was slow, and a building
which would satisfy the demands made upon it for
a century would necessarily be of a substantial nature.
But with us in a single generation even the
best we can do with all the data and facilities at
our command is out of date almost before it shows
signs of appreciable wear. So a building erected
today is outclassed tomorrow. The writer well remembers
the late Douglas Robinson, when outlining
the location and property to be improved by the
construction of a building some twenty years ago,
ending his directions with the proviso that it must be
‘the cheapest thing that will hold together for fifteen
years’! When the amortization charges must be
based on so short a period as this, and with land
taxes constantly increasing, it becomes obvious that
construction must be based upon a cubic foot valuation
that prohibits the use of any but the cheapest
materials and methods.... Even the cost of carrying
the required capital inactive during the period
of production has its effect in speeding up production
to the point where every part of the building
that, by any ingenuity of man, can be machine-made
must be so made.”</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[168]</span></p>
<p>Since the features that govern the construction
of modern buildings are conditioned by external
canons of mechanism, purpose and adaptation to
need play a small part in the design, and the esthetic
element itself enters largely by accident. The plan
of the modern building is not fundamental to its
treatment; it derives automatically from the methods
and materials employed. The skyscraper is inevitably
a honeycomb of cubes, draped with a fireproof
material: as mechanically conceived, it is
readily convertible: the floors are of uniform height
and the windows of uniform spacing, and with no
great difficulty the hotel becomes an office building,
the office building a loft; and I confidently look forward
to seeing the tower floors become apartments—indeed
this conversion has already taken place on
a small scale. Where the need of spanning a great
space without using pillars exists, as in a theater
or an auditorium, structural steel has given the
architect great freedom; and in these departments
he has learned to use his material well; for here
steel can do economically and esthetically what
masonry can do only at an unseemly cost, or not at
all.</p>
<p>What is weak in some of our buildings, however, is<span class="pagenum">[169]</span>
not the employment of certain materials, but the
application of a single formula to every problem.
In the bare mechanical shell of the modern skyscraper
there is precious little place for architectural modulation
and detail; the development of the skyscraper
has been towards the pure mechanical form. Our first
tall buildings were designed for the most part by
men who thought in terms of established architectural
forms: Burnham and Root’s Monadnock Building,
in Chicago, which has exerted such a powerful
influence over the new school of German architects,
was an almost isolated exception; and, significantly
enough, it did not employ the steel skeleton! The
academic architects compared the skyscraper to a
column, with a base, a shaft, and a capital; and
they sought to relieve its empty face with an elaborate
modeling of surface, like that of the old Flatiron
Building. Then the skyscraper was treated as
a tower, and its vertical lines were accented by piers
which simulated the acrobatic leap of stone construction:
the Woolworth Tower and the Bush Tower
were both designed in this fashion, and, in spite of
numerous defects in detail, they remain with the new
Shelton Hotel in New York among the most satisfactory
examples of the skyscraper.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[170]</span></p>
<p>Neither column nor buttress has anything to do
with the internal construction of the skyscraper;
both forms are “false” or “applied.” Under the
veracious lead of the late Mr. Louis Sullivan, the
buildings of the machine period have accepted the
logic of the draped cube, and the only gestures of
traditional architecture that remain are the ornaments
that cling to the very highest and the very
lowest stories. Those buildings which do not follow
this logic for the most part accentuate the clumsy
unimaginativeness of the designer: the new Standard
Oil building in New York, with its vestigial orders,
shows an interesting profile across the harbor almost
in spite of itself, but at a closer range will not bear
criticism.</p>
<p>An ornamentalist, like Mr. Louis Sullivan, is perhaps
at his best against the simple planes of the
modern building: but a different order of imagination,
an imagination like that of the Norman builders,
is powerless in the face of this problem—or it
becomes brutal. If modern building has become engineering,
modern architecture retains a precarious
foothold as ornament, or to put it more frankly, as
scene painting. Indeed, what is the bare interior of
a modern office or apartment house but a stage, waiting<span class="pagenum">[171]</span>
for the scenery to be shifted, and a new play to
be put on. It is due to this similarity, I believe, that
modern interior decoration has so boldly accepted
the standards and effects of stage-design. A newspaper
critic referred to Mr. Norman-Bel Geddes as
having lined the interior of the Century Theater
with a cathedral: well, in the same way, the interior
of a modern skyscraper is lined with a factory, an
office, or a home.</p>
<p>It is not for nothing that almost every detail of
the mechanized building follows a standard pattern
and preserves a studious anonymity. Except for
the short run of the entrance, the original architect
has no part in its interior development. If the architect
himself is largely paralyzed by his problem,
what shall we say of the artisans, and of the surviving
handicraft workers who still contribute their
quota of effort to the laying of bricks and stones,
to the joining of pipes, to the plastering of ceilings?
Gone are most of their opportunities for the exercise
of skilled intelligence, to say nothing of art:
they might as well make paper-boxes or pans for all
the personal stamp they can give to their work.
Bound to follow the architect’s design, as the printer
is supposed to follow the author’s words, it is no<span class="pagenum">[172]</span>
wonder that they behave like the poor drudge in
the Chicago Exposition who left bare or half-ornamented
the columns which the architect had not
bothered to duplicate in full in the haste of finishing
his drawing. Is it any wonder, too, that the last
vestige of guild standards is gone: that the politics
of industry, the bargaining for better wages and
fewer hours, concerns them more than their control
over their job and the honor and veracity of their
workmanship? What kind of work can a man put
into “the cheapest building that will last fifteen
years”?</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>The chief justification for our achievements in mechanical
architecture has been brought forth by
those who believe it has provided the basis for a
new style. Unfortunately, the enthusiasts who
have put the esthetic achievements of mechanical
architecture in a niche by themselves, and who
have serenely disregarded all its lapses and failures
and inefficiencies, have centered their attention
mainly upon its weakest feature—the skyscraper.
I cannot help thinking that they have looked in
the wrong place. The economic and social reasons<span class="pagenum">[173]</span>
for regarding the skyscraper as undesirable have
been briefly alluded to; if they needed any further
confirmation, a week’s experience of the miseries
of rapid transit would perhaps be sufficient. It
remains to point out that the esthetic reasons are
just as sound.</p>
<p>All the current praise of the skyscraper boils
down to the fact that the more recent buildings have
ceased to be as bad as their prototypes. Granted.
The uneasy hemming and hawing of ornament, which
once agitated the whole façade, has now been reduced
to a concentrated gesture; and the zoning
ordinances that have been established in many large
American cities have transformed the older, top-heavy
building into a tower or a pyramid. That
this is something of an advance is beyond dispute; in
New York one need only compare the Fisk Tire
Building with the United States Tire Building, representing
respectively the later and the earlier work
of the same architects, to see what a virtue can be
made of legal necessity. A great architecture, however,
is something to be seen and felt and lived in.
By this criterion most of our pretentious buildings
are rather pathetic.</p>
<p>When one approaches Manhattan Island, for instance,<span class="pagenum">[174]</span>
from the Staten Island Ferry or the Brooklyn
Bridge, the great towers on the tip of the island
sometimes look like the fairy stalagmites of an
opened grotto; and from an occasional vantage
point on the twentieth floor of an office building one
may now and again recapture this impression. But
need I point out that one can count on one’s fingers
the number of buildings in New York or Chicago
that one can approach from the street in similar
fashion? For the millions who fill the pavements
and shuttle back and forth in tubes, the skyscraper
as a tall, cloudward building does not exist. Its
esthetic features are the entrance, the elevator, and
the window-pocked wall; and if there has been any
unique efflorescence of a fresh style at these points,
I have been unable to discover it.</p>
<p>What our critics have learned to admire in our
great buildings is their photographs—and that is
another story. In an article chiefly devoted to
praise of the skyscraper, in a number of The Arts,
the majority of the illustrations were taken from a
point that the man in the street never reaches. In
short, it is an architecture, not for men, but for
angels and aviators!</p>
<p>If buildings are to be experienced directly, and<span class="pagenum">[175]</span>
not through the vicarious agency of the photograph,
the skyscraper defeats its own ends; for a city built
so that tall buildings could be approached and appreciated
would have avenues ten times the width of
the present ones; and a city so generously planned
would have no need for the sort of building whose sole
economic purpose is to make the most of monopoly
and congestion. In order to accommodate the
office-dwellers in the Chicago Loop, for example, if
a minimum of twenty stories were the restriction,
the streets would have to be 241 feet wide,
according to a calculation of Mr. Raymond Unwin,
in the Journal of the American Institute of Architects.</p>
<p>One need not dwell upon the way in which these
obdurate, overwhelming masses take away from the
little people who walk in their shadows any semblance
of dignity as human beings; it is perhaps
inevitable that one of the greatest mechanical
achievements in a thoroughly dehumanized civilization
should, no doubt unconsciously, achieve this
wry purpose. It is enough to point out that the
virtues of the skyscraper are mainly exercises in
technique. They have precious little to do with the
human arts of seeing, feeling, and living, or with the<span class="pagenum">[176]</span>
noble architectural end of making buildings which
stimulate and enhance these arts.</p>
<p>A building that one cannot readily see, a building
that reduces the passerby to a mere mote, whirled
and buffeted by the winds of traffic, a building that
has no accommodating grace or perfection in its
interior furnishing, beyond its excellent lavatories—in
what sense is such a building a great work of
architecture, or how can the mere manner of its
construction create a great style? One might as
well say, with Robert Dale Owen, that the brummagem
gothic of the Smithsonian Institution was a
return to organic architecture. Consider what painful
efforts of interior decoration are necessary before
the skyscraper-apartment can recapture the
faded perfume of the home. Indeed, it takes no
very discerning eye to see that in a short time we
shall be back again in interiors belonging to the period
of the ottoman and the whatnot, in order to
restore a homely sense of comfort and esthetic ease
to the eviscerated structure of the modern fireproof
apartment. What chiefly distinguishes our modern
American work in this department from that of the
disreputable ’eighties is that the earlier architects
were conscious of their emptiness, and attempted<span class="pagenum">[177]</span>
feverishly to hide it: whereas our moderns do not
regard emptiness as a serious lapse, and are inclined
to boast about it.</p>
<p>There is a sense, of course, in which these modern
colossi express our civilization. It is a romantic
notion, however, to believe that this is an important
or beautiful fact. Our slums express our civilization,
too, and our rubbish heaps tell sermons that
our stones conceal. The only expression that really
matters in architecture is that which contributes
in a direct and positive way to the good life: that is
why there is so much beauty to the square foot in
an old New England village, and so little, beyond
mere picturesqueness, in the modern metropolis. A
building stands or falls, even as a pure work of art,
by its just relation to the city around it. Without
a sense of scale—and the skyscraper has destroyed
our sense of scale—the effect of any single building
is nullified.</p>
<h3>V</h3>
<p>The provinces in which mechanical architecture
has been genuinely successful are those in which
there have been no conventional precedents, and in
which the structure has achieved a sense of absolute<span class="pagenum">[178]</span>
form by following sympathetically the limitations
of material and function. Just as the bridge summed
up what was best in early industrialism, so the modern
subway station, the modern lunch room, the
modern factory, and its educational counterpart,
the modern school, have often been cast in molds
which would make them conspicuous esthetic achievements.
In the Aristotelian sense, every purpose contains
an inherent form; and it is only natural that
a factory or lunchroom or grain elevator, intelligently
conceived, should become a structure quite
different in every aspect from the precedents that
are upheld in the schools.</p>
<p>It would be a piece of brash esthetic bigotry to
deny the esthetic values that derive from machinery:
the clean surfaces, the hard lines, the calibrated perfection
that the machine has made possible carry
with them a beauty quite different from that of
handicraft—but often it is a beauty. Our new
sensitiveness to the forms of useful objects and
purely utilitarian structures is an excellent sign;
and it is not surprising that this sensitiveness has
arisen first among artists. Many of our power-plants
are majestic; many of our modern factories
are clean and lithe and smart, designed with unerring<span class="pagenum">[179]</span>
logic and skill. Put alongside buildings in which
the architect has glorified his own idiosyncrasy or
pandered to the ritual of conspicuous waste, our
industrial plants at least have honesty and sincerity
and an inner harmony of form and function. There
is nothing peculiar to machine-technology in these
virtues, however, for the modern factory shares them
with the old New England mill, the modern grain
elevator with the Pennsylvania barn, the steamship
with the clipper, and the airplane hangar with the
castle.</p>
<p>The error with regard to these new forms of
building is the attempt to universalize the mere
process or form, instead of attempting to universalize
the scientific spirit in which they have been
conceived. The design for a dwelling-house which
ignores everything but the physical necessities of
the occupants is the product of a limited conception
of science which stops short at physics and mechanics,
and neglects biology, psychology, and sociology. If
it was bad esthetics to design steel frames decorated
with iron cornucopias and flowers, it is equally bad
esthetics to design homes as if babies were hatched
from incubators, and as if wheels, rather than love
and hunger, made the world go round. During the<span class="pagenum">[180]</span>
first movement of industrialism it was the pathetic
fallacy that crippled and warped the new achievements
of technology; today we are beset by the
plutonic fallacy, which turns all living things it
touches into metal.</p>
<p>In strict justice to our better sort of mechanical
architecture, I must point out that the error of the
mechanolators is precisely the opposite error to
that of the academies. The weakness of conventional
architecture in the schools of the nineteenth
century was the fact that it applied only to a limited
province: we knew what an orthodox palace or post
office would be like, and we had even seen their guilty
simulacra in tenement-houses and shopfronts; but
no one had ever dared to imagine what a Beaux Arts
factory would be like; and such approaches to it
as the pottery works in Lambeth only made the possibility
more dubious. The weakness of our conventional
styles of architecture was that they
stopped short at a province called building—which
meant the province where the ordinary rules of esthetic
decency and politeness were completely abandoned,
for lack of a precedent.</p>
<p>The modernist is correct in saying that the mass
of building ought to speak the same language; it is<span class="pagenum">[181]</span>
well for him to attempt to follow Mr. Louis Sullivan,
in his search for a “rule so broad as to admit of no
exceptions.” Where the modernist becomes confused,
however, is in regarding the <em>dictionary</em> of
modern forms, whose crude elements are exhibited
in our factories and skyscrapers and grain elevators,
as in any sense equivalent for their creative
expression. So far our mechanical architecture is
a sort of structural Esperanto: it has a vocabulary
without a literature, and when it steps beyond the
elements of its grammar it can only translate badly
into its own tongue the noble poems and epics that
the Romans and Greeks and medieval builders left
behind them.</p>
<p>The leaders of modernism do not, indeed, make
the mistake that some of their admirers have made:
Mr. Frank Lloyd Wright’s pleasure pavilions and
hotels do not resemble either factories or garages or
grain elevators: they represent the same tendencies,
perhaps, but they do so with respect to an entirely
different set of human purposes. In one important
characteristic, Mr. Wright’s style has turned its
back upon the whole world of engineering: whereas
the steel cage lends itself to the vertical skyscraper,
Mr. Wright’s designs are the very products of the<span class="pagenum">[182]</span>
prairie, in their low-lying, horizontal lines, in their
flat roofs, while at the same time they defy the neutral
gray or black or red of the engineering structure
by their colors and ornament.</p>
<p>In sum, the best modern work does not merely
respect the machine: it respects the people who use
it. It is the lesser artists and architects who, unable
to control and mold the products of the machine,
have glorified it in its nakedness, much as the
producer of musical comedies, in a similar mood of
helpless adulation, has “glorified” the American girl—as
if either the machine or the girl needed it.</p>
<p>It has been a genuine misfortune in America that,
as Mr. Sullivan bitterly pointed out in The Autobiography
of an Idea, the growth of imperialism
burked the development of a consonant modern
style. In Europe, particularly in Finland, Germany,
and the Netherlands, the best American work
has been appreciated and followed up, and as so
often happens, exaggerated; so that the esthetic
appreciation of the machine has been carried across
the Atlantic and back again, very much in the way
that Emerson’s individualism was transformed by
Nietzsche and became the mystic doctrine of the
Superman. Some of the results of this movement<span class="pagenum">[183]</span>
are interesting and valid: the work of the Dutch
architects, for example, in the garden suburbs around
Amsterdam: but what pleases one in these new compositions
is not the mechanical rigor of form but
the playfulness of spirit—they are good architecture
precisely because they are something more than mere
engineering. Except for a handful of good precedents,
our mechanical work in America does not
express this vitality. The machine has stamped us;
and we have not reacted.</p>
<p>Moreover, in the building of separate houses in
the city and its suburbs, where the demands of mechanical
efficiency are not so drastic as they are in
the office building, the effect of the machine process
has been to narrow the scope of individual taste and
personality. The designer, whether he is the architect,
the owner, or the working contractor, works
within a tradition whose bearing lies beyond him.
Outside this mechanical tradition we have had many
examples of good individual work, like the stone
houses that have been erected around Philadelphia,
and the more or less native cement and adobe houses
in New Mexico and California: but the great mass
of modern houses are no longer framed for some
definite site and some definite occupants: they are<span class="pagenum">[184]</span>
manufactured for a blind market. The boards are
cut to length in the sawmill, the roofing is fabricated
in a roofing plant, the window frames are cut in
standard sizes and put together in the framing factory,
the balustrade is done in a turning mill, the
very internal fittings like china closets and chests
are made in a distant plant, after one of a dozen
patterns fixed and exemplified in the catalog. The
business of the building worker is reduced to a mere
assemblage of parts; and except for the more expensive
grades of work, the architect is all but
eliminated. The charming designs that the European
modernists make testify to the strength of
their long architectural tradition even in the face
of machinery; the truth is that they fit our modern
methods of house-production scarcely much better
than the thatched cottage of clay and wattle. The
nemesis of mechanism is that it inexorably eliminates
the architect—even the architect who worships its
achievements!</p>
<p>So much of the detail of a building is established
by factory standards and patterns that even the
patron himself has precious little scope for giving
vent to his impulses in the design or execution of
the work; for every divergence from a standardized<span class="pagenum">[185]</span>
design represents an additional expense. In fact,
the only opportunity for expressing his taste and
personality is in choosing the mode in which the
house is to be built: he must find his requirements
in Italy, Colonial America, France, Tudor England,
or Spain—woe to him if he wants to find them in
twentieth-century America! Thus the machine process
has created a standardized conception of style:
of itself it can no more invent a new style than a
mummy can beget children. If one wishes a house
of red brick it will be Georgian or Colonial; that is
to say, the trimming will be white, the woodwork
will have classic moldings, and the electric-light fixtures
will be pseudo-candlesticks in silvered metal.
If one builds a stucco house, one is doomed by similar
mechanical canons to rather heavy furniture in
the early Renaissance forms, properly duplicated by
the furniture makers of Grand Rapids—and so on.
The notion of an American stucco house is so foreign
to the conception of the machine mode that only
the very poor, and the very rich, can afford it. Need
I add that Colonial or Italian, when it falls from the
mouth of the “realtor” has nothing to do with
authentic Colonial or Italian work?</p>
<p>Commercial concentration and the national market<span class="pagenum">[186]</span>
waste resources by neglect, as in the case of the
Appalachian forests they squandered them by pillage.
Standardized materials and patterns and
plans and elevations—here are the ingredients of
the architecture of the machine age: by escaping it
we get our superficially vivacious suburbs; by accepting
it, those vast acres of nondescript monotony
that, call them West Philadelphia or Long Island
City or what you will, are but the anonymous districts
of Coketown. The chief thing needful for
the full enjoyment of this architecture is a standardized
people. Here our various educational institutions,
from the advertising columns of the five-cent
magazine to the higher centers of learning,
from the movie to the radio, have not perhaps altogether
failed the architect.</p>
<p>The manufactured house is set in the midst of a
manufactured environment. The quality of this
environment calls for satire rather than description;
and yet a mere catalog of its details, such as
Mr. Sinclair Lewis gave in Babbitt, is almost
satire in itself. In this environment the home tends
more and more to take last place: Mr. Henry
Wright has in fact humorously suggested that at
the present increasing ratio of site-costs—roads,<span class="pagenum">[187]</span>
sewers, and so forth—to house-costs, the house itself
will disappear in favor of the first item by
1970. The prophetic symbol of this event is the
tendency of the motor-car and the temple-garage
to take precedence over the house. Already these
incubi have begun to occupy the last remaining
patch of space about the suburban house, where up
to a generation ago there was a bit of garden, a
swing for the children, a sandpile, and perhaps a
few fruit trees.</p>
<p>The end of a civilization that considers buildings
as mere machines is that it considers human beings
as mere machine-tenders: it therefore frustrates or
diverts the more vital impulses which would lead to
the culture of the earth or the intelligent care of
the young. Blindly rebellious, men take revenge
upon themselves for their own mistakes: hence the
modern mechanized house, with its luminous bathroom,
its elegant furnace, its dainty garbage-disposal
system, has become more and more a thing to
get away from. The real excuse for the omnipresent
garage is that in a mechanized environment of
subways and house-machines some avenue of escape
and compensation must be left open. Distressing as
a Sunday automobile ride may be on the crowded<span class="pagenum">[188]</span>
highways that lead out of the great city, it is one
degree better than remaining in a neighborhood
unsuited to permanent human habitation. So intense
is the demand for some saving grace, among all these
frigid commercial perfections, that handicraft is
being patronized once more, in a manner that would
have astonished Ruskin, and the more audacious sort
of interior decorator is fast restoring the sentimentalities
in glass and wax flowers that marked the
Victorian Age. This is a pretty comment upon the
grand achievements of modern industry and science;
but it is better, perhaps, that men should be foolish
than that they should be completely dehumanized.</p>
<p>The architecture of other civilizations has sometimes
been the brutal emblem of the warrior, like
that of the Assyrians: it has remained for the architecture
of our own day in America to be fixed
and stereotyped and blank, like the mind of a Robot.
The age of the machine has produced an architecture
fit only for lathes and dynamos to dwell in:
incomplete and partial in our applications of
science, we have forgotten that there is a science of
humanity, as well as a science of material things.
Buildings which do not answer to this general description
are either aristocratic relics of the age<span class="pagenum">[189]</span>
of handicraft, enjoyed only by the rich, or they are
fugitive attempts to imitate cheaply the ways and
gestures of handicraft.</p>
<p>We have attempted to live off machinery, and the
host has devoured us. It is time that we ceased to
play the parasite: time that we looked about us, to
see what means we have for once more becoming men.
The prospects of architecture are not divorced
from the prospects of the community. If man is
created, as the legends say, in the image of the gods,
his buildings are done in the image of his own mind
and institutions.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[193]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="CHAPTER_EIGHT">CHAPTER EIGHT<br/>
<span class="cheaderfont">ARCHITECTURE AND CIVILIZATION</span></h2>
</div>
<h3>I</h3>
<p>In the course of this survey we have seen how
architecture and civilization develop hand in hand:
the characteristic buildings of each period are the
memorials to their dearest institutions. The essential
structure of the community—the home, meeting-place,
the work-place—remains; but the covering
changes and passes, like the civilization itself, when
new materials, new methods of work, new ideas and
habits and ways of feeling, come into their own.</p>
<p>If this interpretation of the rôle of architecture
is just, there is little use in discussing the needs and
promises of architecture without relating the shell
itself to the informing changes that may or may not
take place in the life of the community itself. To
fancy that any widespread improvement of architecture
lies principally with the architects is an
esthetic delusion: in a barren soil the most fertile
geniuses are cut off from their full growth. We have
not lacked architects of boldness and originality,
from Latrobe to Louis H. Sullivan: nor have we
lacked men of great ability, from Thomas Jefferson<span class="pagenum">[194]</span>
to Bertram Goodhue; nor yet have we lacked men
who stood outside the currents of their time and
kept their own position, from Richardson to Dr.
Cram. With all these capacities at our disposal,
our finest efforts in building remain chaotic and
undisciplined and dispersed—the reflection of our
accumulated civilization.</p>
<p>Our architectural development is bound up with
the course of our civilization: this is a truism. To
the extent that we permit our institutions and organizations
to function blindly, as our bed is made,
so must we lie on it; and while we may nevertheless
produce isolated buildings of great esthetic interest,
like Messrs. Cram and Goodhue’s additions to
West Point, like The Shelton, like a hundred country
estates, the matrix of our physical community
will not be affected by the existence of separate jewels;
and most of our buildings will not merely be outside
the province of the architectural profession—they
will be the product of minds untouched, for the
most part, by humane standards. Occasionally the
accidental result will be good, as has happened
sometimes in our skyscrapers and factories and
grain elevators; but an architecture that must depend
upon accidental results is not exactly a triumph<span class="pagenum">[195]</span>
of the imagination, still less is it a triumph
of exact technology.</p>
<p>Looking back upon the finished drama, it is convenient
to regard our community and our builders
as creatures of their environment: once their choices
are made, they seem inevitable. On this account
even the pomp of the imperial architects can be
justified, as the very voice and gesture of the period
they consummated. Looking forward, however, this
convenient fiction of inevitability is no longer serviceable:
we are in the realm of contingency and
choice; and at any moment a new factor may be
introduced which will alter profoundly the economic
and social life of the community. The Great War in
Europe, the revolution in Russia, the spread of
motor transportation in America, the idea of non-coöperation
in India—I select these at random as
matters which during the last generation have altered
profoundly the unceasing “drift of things.”</p>
<p>The future of our civilization depends upon our
ability to select and control our heritage from the
past, to alter our present attitudes and habits, and
to project fresh forms into which our energies may
be freely poured. On our ability to re-introduce
old elements, as the humanists of the late Middle<span class="pagenum">[196]</span>
Ages brought back the classic literature and uncovered
the Roman monuments, or to introduce new
elements, as the inventors and engineers of the last
century brought in physical science and the machine-tool
technology, our position as creators depends.
During the last century our situation has
changed from that of the creators of machinery to
that of creatures of the machine system; and it is
perhaps time that we contrived new elements which
will alter once more the profounder contours of our
civilization.</p>
<p>Unfortunately for our comfort and peace of mind,
any real change in our civilization depends upon
much more complicated, and much more drastic
measures than the old-fashioned reformer, who
sought to work a change of heart or to alter the
distribution of income, ever recognized; and it will
do little good to talk about a “coming renaissance”
unless we have a dim idea of the sort of creature that
is to be born again. Our difficulty, it seems to me,
is due to the fact that the human sciences have
lagged behind the physical ones; and up to the
present time our good intentions have been frustrated
for the lack of the necessary instruments of
analysis. It may be helpful and amusing, however,<span class="pagenum">[197]</span>
to see what we can do in this department with the
instruments that are already at hand.</p>
<p>In every community, as Frédéric Le Play first
pointed out, there are three elements: the place, the
work, and the people; the sociologist’s equivalent
of environment, function, and organism. Out of
the interaction of the folk and their place, through
the work, the simple life of the community develops.
At the same time, each of these elements carries with
it its specific spiritual heritage. The people have
their customs and manners and morals and laws;
or as we might say more briefly, their institutions;
the work has its technology, its craft-experience,
from the simple lore of peasant and breeder to the
complicated formulæ of the modern chemists and
metallurgists; while the deeper perception of the
“place,” through the analysis of the falling stone,
the rising sun, the running water, the decomposing
vegetation, and the living animal gives rise to the
tradition of “learning” and science.</p>
<p>With this simple outline in mind, the process that
created our present mechanical civilization becomes
a little more plain; and we can appreciate, perhaps,
the difficulties that stand in the way of any swift and
easy transformation.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[198]</span></p>
<p>Thus our present order was due to a mingled
change in every aspect of the community: morally,
it was protestantism; legally, the rise of representative
government; socially, the introduction of
“democracy”; in custom, the general breakdown of
the family unit; industrially, it meant the collapse
of the guilds and the growth of the factory-system;
scientifically, the spread of physical science, and the
increased knowledge of the terrestrial globe—and so
on.</p>
<p>Each of these facets of the community’s life was
the object of separate attention and effort: but it
was their totality which produced the modern order.
Where—among other reasons—the moral
preparation for mechanical civilization was incomplete,
as in the Catholic countries, the industrial
revolution was also late and incomplete; where the
craft-tradition remained strong, as in the beech forests
of the Chilterns, the industrial change made
fewer inroads into the habits of the community, than,
let us say, in Lancashire, where modern industry
was untempered and unchallenged.</p>
<p>If the circumstances which hedge in our architecture
are to be transformed, it is not sufficient,
with Mr. Louis Sullivan, to say that we must accept<span class="pagenum">[199]</span>
and enthrone the virtues of democracy; still
less is there any meaning in the attempt of the Educational
Committee of the American Institute of
Architects to educate public taste in the arts. Nor
is there any genuine esthetic salvation in the demand
of the modernists that we embrace in more whole-hearted
fashion the machine. Our architecture has
been full of false starts and unfulfilled promises,
precisely because the ground has not been worked
enough beforehand to receive the new seeds.</p>
<p>If we are to have a fine architecture, we must begin
at the other end from that where our sumptuously
illustrated magazines on home-building and
architecture begin—not with the building itself, but
with the whole complex out of which architect,
builder, and patron spring, and into which the
finished building, whether it be a cottage or a
skyscraper, is set. Once the conditions are ripe
for a good architecture, the plant will flower by
itself: it did so in the Middle Ages, as a hundred
little towns and villages between Budapest and
Glastonbury still testify; it did so again within a
limited area among the swells of the Renaissance;
and it is springing forth lustily today in the garden
cities of England, the Netherlands, and the Baltic<span class="pagenum">[200]</span>
countries. The notion that our architecture will be
improved by courses of appreciation in our museums
and colleges is, to put it quite mildly, one of the
decadent deceits of snobbery. It is only paper
flowers that grow in this fashion.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>In order to get our bearings, we shall pull apart,
one by one, the principal elements in our heritage
of civilization in the United States, and examine
them separately. This is a dangerous convenience,
however, and I must emphasize that these strands
are tightly intertwined and bound up. It is only in
thought that one can take them apart. No one has
ever encountered man, save on the earth; no one has
ever seen the earth, save through the eyes of a man.
There is no logical priority in place, work, and
people. In discussing the community one either
deals with it as a whole, or one’s discussion is incomplete
and faulty.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>The capital sign of the early settlements beyond
the seashore was the clearing; and since the great<span class="pagenum">[201]</span>
majority of newcomers lived by agriculture, the
forest itself appeared merely as an obstacle to be
removed. The untouched woods of America were all
too lush and generous, and if an occasional Leatherstocking
loved them, the new settler saw only land
to clear and wood to burn. In the New England
village, the tradition of culture was perhaps applied
to the land itself, and elsewhere there are
occasional elements of good practice, in the ordered
neatness of boulder-fences. For the most part,
however, the deliberate obliteration of the natural
landscape became a great national sport, comparable
to the extermination of bison which the
casual western traveler devoted himself to at a later
date.</p>
<p>The stripping of the Appalachian forest was the
first step in our campaign against nature. By 1860
the effect was already grave enough to warn an
acute observer, like George Perkins Marsh, of the
danger to our civilization, and to prompt him in
Earth and Man, to remind his countrymen that
other civilizations about the Mediterranean and the
Adriatic had lost their top-soil and ruined their
agriculture through the wanton destruction of their
forests.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[202]</span></p>
<p>In the meanwhile, a new factor had entered. If
before the nineteenth century we cleared the forest
to make way for the farm, with the entrance of the
industrial pioneer we began to clear the farm to
parcel out the city. We have called this process the
settlement of America, but the name is anomalous,
for we formed the habit of using the land, not as a
home, a permanent seat of culture, but as a means
to something else—principally as a means to the
temporary advantages of profitable speculation and
exploitation.</p>
<p>James Mackay, a charitable Scotch observer in
the middle of the nineteenth century, explained our
negligence of the earth by the fact that we pinned
our affections to institutions rather than places, and
cared not how the landscape was massacred as long
as we lived under the same flag and enjoyed the
same forms of government. There is no doubt a
little truth in this observation; but it was not merely
our attachment to republican government that
caused this behavior: it was even more, perhaps, our
disattachment from the affiliations of a settled life.
The pioneer, to put it vulgarly, was on the make and
on the move; it did not matter to him how he treated
the land, since by the time he could realize its deficiencies<span class="pagenum">[203]</span>
he had already escaped to a new virgin
area. “What had posterity done for him?”</p>
<p>The pioneers who turned their backs on a civilized
way of life in order to extend the boundaries of
civilization, left us with a heavy burden—not merely
blasted and disorderly landscapes, but the habit of
tolerating and producing blasted and disorderly
landscapes. As Cobbett pointed out in his attempt
to account for the unkempt condition of the American
farm, the farmer in this country lacked the example
of the great landed estates, where the woods
had become cultivated parks, and the meadowland
had become lawns. Without this cultivated example
in the country, it is no wonder that our cities have
been littered, frayed at the edges, ugly; no wonder
that our pavements so quickly obliterate trees and
grass; no wonder that so many towns are little more
than gashes of metal and stone.</p>
<p>Those who had been bred on the land brought into
the city none of that disciplined care which might
have preserved some of its amenities. They left the
smoke of the clearings, which was a sign of rural
“progress”; they welcomed the smoke of the towns,
and all that accompanied it.</p>
<p>It is scarcely a paradox to say that the improvement<span class="pagenum">[204]</span>
of our cities must proceed inwards from the
countryside; for it is largely a matter of reversing
the process which converts the farm into incipient
blocks of real estate. Once we assimilate the
notion that soil and site have uses quite apart from
sale, we shall not continue to barbarize and waste
them. Consider how the water’s edge of lower Manhattan
was developed without the slightest regard
for its potential facilities for recreation; how the
Acropolis of Pittsburgh, the Hump, was permitted
to turn into a noisome slum; how the unique beauty
of Casco Bay has been partly secured only by Portland’s
inferiority as a shipping center. Indeed, all
up and down the country one can pick up a thousand
examples of towns misplaced, of recreation
areas becoming factory sites, of industries located
without intelligent reference to raw materials or
power or markets or the human beings who serve
them, of agricultural land being turned prematurely
into suburban lots, and of small rural communities
which need the injection of new industries and enterprises,
languishing away whilst a metropolis not
fifty miles away continues to absorb more people,
who daily pay a heavy premium for their congestion.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[205]</span></p>
<p>I have already drawn attention to the waste of
local materials in connection with our manufacture
of buildings, our concentration of markets, and our
standardization of styles. It is plain that our
architects would not have to worry so painfully
about the latest fashion-page of architectural tricks,
if they had the opportunity to work more consistently
with the materials at hand, using brick where
clay was plentiful, stone where that was of good quality,
and cement where concrete adapted itself to
local needs—as it does so well near the seashore,
and, for a different reason, in the south. Wood,
one of our most important materials for both exterior
and interior, has suffered by just the opposite
of neglect: so completely have our Appalachian
forests been mined, and so expensive are the freight
charges for the long haul from the Pacific coast,
that good housing in the east depends to no little
extent upon our ability to recover continuous local
supplies of timber throughout the Appalachian region.</p>
<p>(It is characteristic of our mechanical and metropolitan
civilization that one of the great sources
of timber waste is the metropolitan newspaper: and
one of the remoter blessings of a sounder regional<span class="pagenum">[206]</span>
development is that it would, perhaps, remove the
hourly itch for the advertising sheet, and by the
same token would provide large quantities of wood
for housing, without calling for the destruction of
ten acres of spruce for the Sunday edition alone!
I give the reader the privilege of tracing the pleasant
ramifications of this notion.)</p>
<p>To see the interdependence of city and country, to
realize that the growth and concentration of one
is associated with the depletion and impoverishment
of the other, to appreciate that there is a just and
harmonious balance between the two—this capacity
we have lacked. Before we can build well on any
scale we shall, it seems to me, have to develop an
art of regional planning, an art which will relate
city and countryside in a new pattern from that
which was the blind creation of the industrial and
the territorial pioneer. Instead of regarding the
countryside as so much grist doomed to go eventually
into the metropolitan mill, we must plan to
preserve and develop all our natural resources to the
limit.</p>
<p>It goes without saying that any genuine attempt
to provide for the social and economic renewal of a
region cannot be constrained to preserve vested<span class="pagenum">[207]</span>
land-values and property rights and privileges; indeed,
if the land is to be fully loved and cared for
again we must recover it in something more than
name only. The main objection to keeping our
natural resources in the hands of the community,
namely, that private capital is more zealous at exploitation,
is precisely the reason for urging the
first course. Our land has suffered from zeal in
exploitation; and it would be much better, for example,
that our water power resources should remain
temporarily undeveloped, than that they should
be incontinently used by private corporations to
concentrate population in the centers where a high
tariff can be charged. The number of things that
are waiting to be done—the planting of town forests,
the communal restoration of river banks and beaches,
the transformation of bare roads into parkways—will
of course differ in each region and locality;
and my aim here is only to point to a general
objective.</p>
<p>The beginnings of genuine regional planning have
already been made in Ontario, Canada, where the
social utilization of water-power has directly benefited
the rural communities, and given them an independent
lease on life. In the United States, Mr.<span class="pagenum">[208]</span>
Benton Mackaye has sketched out a bold and fundamental
plan for associating the development of a
spinal recreational trail with an electric power development
for the whole Appalachian region, along
the ridgeway; both trail and power being used as
a basis for the re-afforestation and the re-peopling
of the whole upland area, with a corresponding
decentralization and depopulation of the overcrowded,
spotty coastal region. Such a scheme
would call for a pretty thorough dislocation of
metropolitan values; and if it is slow in making
headway, that is only because its gradual institution
would mean that a new epoch had begun in
American civilization. At the present time it is hard
to discover how tangible these new hopes and projects
may be: it is significant, however, that the
Housing and Regional Planning Commission of the
State of New York was called into existence by the
necessity for finding a way out of our metropolitan
tangle; and it is possible that a new orientation in
power and culture is at hand.</p>
<p>In a loose, inconsecutive way, the objectives of
regional planning have been dealt with by the conservation
movement during the last century; and if
the art itself has neither a corpus of experience nor<span class="pagenum">[209]</span>
an established body of practitioners, this is only to
say that it has, as it were, broken through the surface
in a number of places and that it remains to be gathered
up and intelligently used. When regional planning
starts its active career, it will concern itself
to provide a new framework for our communities
which will redistribute population and industry, and
recultivate the environment—substituting forestry
for timber-mining, stable agriculture for soil-mining,
and in general the habit of dressing and keeping the
earth for our traditional American practice of
stripping and deflowering it. Architecture begins
historically when the “Bauer” who plants becomes
the “Bauer” who builds; and if our architecture is
to have a substantial foundation, it is in a refreshened
countryside that we will perhaps find it.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>Let us now turn to industry. The medieval order
was disrupted in America before it could fully take
root. As a result we have no craft-tradition that
is properly native, with the exception of the shipbuilders
and furniture-makers of New England,
whose art has been on the wane since the second<span class="pagenum">[210]</span>
quarter of the nineteenth century. We have covered
up this deficiency by importing from generation to
generation foreign workmen, principally Germans
and Italians, in whose birthplaces the art of using
wood and stone has not been entirely lost; but we
are still far from having created an independent
craft-tradition of our own. If art is the fine efflorescence
of a settled life, invention is the necessity of
the roving pioneer who every day faces new difficulties
and new hazards; and accordingly we have devoted
our energies to the machine, and to the products
of the machine. All that we cannot do in
this medium we regard as “mere” art, and put it
apart from the direct aims and practices of everyday
life.</p>
<p>Our skill in working according to exact formulæ
with machines and instruments of precision is not
to be belittled: socially directed it would put an end
to a hundred vapid drudgeries, and it would perhaps
give the pervasive finish of a style to structures
whose parts are now oddly at sixes and sevens.
Unfortunately for us and for the world in general
the machine did not come simply as a technological
contribution: it appeared when the guild had broken
down and when the joint stock company had gotten<span class="pagenum">[211]</span>
its piratical start as a Company of Gentleman-Adventurers.
As a result, our mechanical age was given
an unsocial twist; and inventions which should have
worked for the welfare of the community were used
for the financial aggrandizement of investors and
monopolizers. In architecture, all the skill of the
technologist and all the taste of the artist have become
subservient to the desire of the financier for a
quick turnover of capital, and the ground landlord
for the maximum exploitation of the land. The sole
chances for good workmanship occur when, by a
happy accident of personality or situation, the patron
asks of the architect and engineer only the best
that they can give.</p>
<p>It is this side of exaggeration to say that today
a building is one kind of manufactured product on
a counter of manufactured products; but with a difference;
for the internal processes of construction
are still, in spite of all our advances, handicrafts.
An interesting result, as Mr. F. L. Ackermann has
pointed out, follows from this fact: namely, that the
pace of building tends to lag behind the pace at
which other goods are produced under the machine-system;
and if this is the case, the quantitative production
of buildings is bound to be too low, while<span class="pagenum">[212]</span>
their cost is bound, by the same process, to be disproportionately
high.</p>
<p>The remedy seized by the engineer, as I have
pointed out, is to introduce the process of standardization
and mechanization wherever possible.
This heightens the pace of building, and by and large
it quickens the rate of deterioration in the thing
built: both processes increase the turnover of buildings,
and so tend to make the art of building approach
the rhythm established by our price-system
for the other mechanical arts; since, under the price-system,
the manufacturer must create a continued
demand for his products or risk flooding the market.
The two ways of creating a demand are to widen the
area of sale or to increase the rate of consumption.
Shoddy materials and shoddy workmanship are the
most obvious means of accomplishing the second end;
but fashion plays a serious part, and maladaptation
to use, though less frequently noted, cannot be
ignored.</p>
<p>All these little anomalies and inconveniences have
come with machinery, not of course because the machine
is inherently wasteful and fraudulent, but because
our social order has not been adapted to its
use. Our gains have been canceled, for the reason<span class="pagenum">[213]</span>
that the vast expansion of our productive powers
has necessitated an equally vast expansion in our
consumptive processes. Hence in many departments
of building, the advantage of machinery has been
almost nullified; and if handicraft has been driven
out, it is less because it is inefficient than because
the pace of production and consumption under
handicraft is so much retarded.</p>
<p>When Ruskin began to agitate for the revival of
handicraft it looked as if our industrial system were
bound to triumph everywhere, and as if Ruskin’s
protest were the last weak chirp of romanticism. At
the present time, however, the issue is not so simple
as it seemed to the builders of the Crystal Palace;
nor are the choices so narrow. What seemed a fugitive
philosophy when applied to the machine by itself
has turned out to be a rigorous and intelligent criticism,
when applied to the machine-system. The use
of the machine in provinces where it has no essential
concern, the network of relationships that have
followed the financial exploitation of machinery—these
things have led to a revolt, in which the engineers
themselves have participated. It is not machinery
alone that causes standardization, we begin
to see, but the national market; it is not the machine<span class="pagenum">[214]</span>
that makes our cheaper houses blank and anonymous,
but the absence of any mediating relation between
the user and the designer—except through the personality
of the builder, who builds for sale.</p>
<p>Apart from this, in certain industries like wood-turning
and furniture-making the introduction of
the gasoline engine and the electric motor has restored
the center of gravity to the small factory,
set in the countryside, and to the individual craftsman
or group, working in the small shop. Professor
Patrick Geddes has characterized the transition
from steam to electricity as one from the
paleotechnic to the neotechnic order; and intuitive
technological geniuses, like Mr. Henry Ford, have
been quick to see the possibilities of little factories set
in the midst of the countryside. Mechanically speaking,
the electric motor has in certain industries and
operations placed the individual worker on a par
with the multiple-machine factory, even as motor
transportation is reducing the advantages of the
big city over the small town or village. It is therefore
not unreasonable to look forward to a continuation
of this development, which will enable groups
of building workers to serve their immediate region
quite as economically as would a multitude of national<span class="pagenum">[215]</span>
factories, producing goods blindly for a blind
national market. With direct sale and service, from
local sawmills and local furniture-making shops, the
older handicrafts themselves might reënter once
more through the back door—as indeed they have
already begun to do in response to the demands of
the wealthy.</p>
<p>I am not suggesting here that handicraft is likely
to replace machinery: what I am suggesting is the
immediate and tangible possibility that machinery
itself may lend itself in its modern forms to a more
purposive system of production, like that fostered by
handicraft; and under this condition the antagonism
and disparity between the two forms of production
need not be so great as they are at present. In a
little valley I happen to be acquainted with, there is
enough running water to supply five families with
electric light from a single power plant; unfortunately,
five families cannot combine for such a
purpose in the state I am speaking of without a
power-franchise; and so the only source of electric
light is a distant commercial power plant using coal.
Here is an obvious case where commercial monopoly
runs contrary to economy and where the benefits of
modern technology are forfeited in the working of<span class="pagenum">[216]</span>
our financial system. Once we understand that
modern industry does not necessarily bring with it
financial and physical concentration, the growth of
smaller centers and a more widespread distribution
of the genuine benefits of technology will, I think,
take place.</p>
<p>It is true that the movement of the last hundred
years has been away from handicraft; but a hundred
years is a relatively short time, and at least a
part of the triumph of machinery has been due to
our naïve enjoyment of it as a plaything. There is
a wide difference between doing away with hand-labor,
as in sawing wood or hoisting a weight, and
eliminating handicraft by using machine tools for
operations which can be subtly performed only by
hand. The first practice is all to the good: the
second essentially misunderstands the significance
of handicraft and machinery, and I must dwell on
this point for a moment, since it is responsible for
a good deal of shoddy thinking on the future of art
and architecture.</p>
<h3>V</h3>
<p>On the human side, the prime distinction overlooked
by the mechanists is that machine work is<span class="pagenum">[217]</span>
principally toil: handicraft, on the other hand, is a
form of living. The operations of the mechanical
arts are inherently servile, because the worker is
forced to keep the pace set by the machine and to
follow the pattern set by the designer, someone other
than himself; whereas the handicrafts are relatively
free, in that they allow a certain leeway to different
types of work and different ways of tackling a job.
These distinctions are bound up with a difference in
the forms that are used; and it is through these
esthetic differences that we may, perhaps, best see
how the personal and mechanical may be apportioned
in the architecture of the future.</p>
<p>The key to handicraft esthetics, it seems to me, is
a sort of vital superfluity. The carpenter is not
content with his planed surface; nor is the mason
satisfied with the smooth stone; nor does the painter
impartially cover the bare wall: no, each worker
must elaborate the bare utilitarian object until the
capital becomes a writhing mass of foliage, until the
domed ceiling becomes the gate of heaven, until each
object gets the imprint of the fantasies that have
ripened in the worker’s head. The craftsman literally
possesses his work, in the sense that the Bible
says a body is possessed by a familiar spirit.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[218]</span></p>
<p>Occasionally, this elaboration passes the point at
which it would give the highest esthetic delight to
the beholder; nevertheless, the craftsman keeps pouring
himself into his job: he must fill up every blank
space, and will not be denied, for carving wood or
hacking stone, when it is done with a free spirit, is
a dignified and enjoyable way of living. Those of
us who have become acclimated to industrialism
sometimes find the effulgence and profusion of
craftsmanship a little bewildering: but if our enjoyment
of the portals of a medieval cathedral or
the façade of an East Indian house is dulled by the
myopic intricacy of the pattern, our appreciation of
the craftsman’s fun and interest should be heightened.
Granting that art is an end in itself, is it not an
end to the worker as well as the spectator? A great
part of craftsmanship needs no other justification
than that it bears the mark of a joyous spirit.</p>
<p>When we compare an ideal product of handicraft,
like a Florentine table of the sixteenth century, with
an ideal product of mechanical art—say a modern
bathroom—the contrasting virtues and defects become
plain. The conditions that make possible good
machine-work are, first of all, a complete calculation
of consequences, embodied in a working drawing or<span class="pagenum">[219]</span>
design: to deviate by a hair’s breadth from this calculation
is to risk failure. The qualities exemplified
in good machine-work follow naturally from the
implements: they are precision, economy, finish, geometric
perfection. When the workman’s personality
intervenes in the process, it is carelessness. If he
leave his imprint, it is a flaw.</p>
<p>A good pattern in terms of the machine is one
that fulfills the bare essentials of an object: the
chairishness of a chair, the washiness of a basin, the
enclosedness of a house, and any superfluity that
may be added by way of ornament is a miscarriage
of the machine-process, for by adding dull work to
work that is already dull it defeats the end for which
machinery may legitimately exist in a humane society;
namely, to produce a necessary quantity of
useful goods with a minimum of human effort.</p>
<p>Craftsmanship, to put the distinction roughly,
emphasizes the worker’s delight in production: anyone
who proposed to reduce the amount of time and
effort spent by the carver in wood or stone would be
in effect attempting to shorten the worker’s life.
Machine-work, on the other hand, tends at its best
to diminish the inescapable drudgeries of production:
any dodge or decoration that increases the time spent<span class="pagenum">[220]</span>
in service to the machine adds to the physical burden
of existence. One is a sufficient end; the other is,
legitimately, only a means to an end.</p>
<p>Our modern communities are far from understanding
this distinction. Just as in art we multiply inadequate
chromolithographs and starve the modern
artist, so in architecture a good part of machine-work
is devoted to the production of fake handicraft,
like the molded stone ornamentation used in huge
Renaissance fireplaces, designed frequently for small
modern apartments that are superheated by steam.
In turn, the surviving worker who now practices
handicraft has been debased into a servile drudge,
using his skill and love, like his predecessors in Imperial
Rome, to copy the original productions of
other artists and craftsmen. Between handicraft
that is devoted to mechanical reproduction and machinery
that is set to reproduce endless simulacra of
handicraft, our esthetic opportunities in art and
architecture are muffed again and again. An occasional
man of talent, like Mr. Samuel Yellin, the
iron-worker, will survive; but the great run of craftsmen
do not.</p>
<p>Now, with due respect to the slickness and perfection
of the best machine-work, we enjoy it because of<span class="pagenum">[221]</span>
the use that it fulfills: it may incidentally achieve
significant form, but no one retains a pickle bottle,
beautifully shaped though Messrs. Heinz and Co.’s
are, for this reason: it was meant for pickles and it
vanishes with the pickles. This is not merely true
of today: it is true of all ages: the common utensils
of life return to the dust, whereas those things that
hold the imprint of man’s imagination—the amphoræ
of the Greek potters, the fragile crane-necked bottles
of the Persians, the seals of the Egyptians—are
preserved from the rubbish heap, no matter how
frail they may be or how small their intrinsic value.</p>
<p>There is something in man that compels him to
respect the human imprint of art: he lives more
nobly surrounded by his own reflections, as a god
might live. The very rage of iconoclasm which the
Mohammedans and Puritans and eighteenth-century
liberals exhibited betrayed a deep respect for the
power of art; for we destroy the things that threaten
our existence. Art, in a certain sense, is the spiritual
varnish that we lay on material things, to insure
their preservation: on its lowest terms, beauty
is justified because it has “survival value.” The
fact that houses which bear the living imprint of
the mind are irreplaceable is what prevents them<span class="pagenum">[222]</span>
from being quickly and callously replaced. Wren’s
churches are preserved beyond their period of desuetude
by Wren’s personality. This process is just
the opposite to that fostered by the machine-system,
and it explains why, in the long run, machine-work
may be unsatisfactory and uneconomical—too
quickly degraded.</p>
<p>Art, in fact, is one of the main ways in which
we escape the vicious circle of economic activity. According
to the conventional economist, our economic
life has but three phases: production, distribution,
and consumption. We work to eat so that we may
eat to work. This is a fairly accurate portrait of
life in an early industrial town; but it does not apply
to the economic processes of a civilized community.
Everywhere, even in regions of difficulty, something
more comes out of production than the current income
and the current saving of capital: sometimes
it is leisure and play, sometimes it is religion,
philosophy, and science, and sometimes it is art.
In the creation of any permanent work of art the
processes of dissipation and consumption are stayed:
hence the only civilized criterion of a community’s
economic life is not the amount of things produced,
but the durability of things created. A community<span class="pagenum">[223]</span>
with a low rate of production and a high standard
of creation will in the long run be physically richer
than a modern city in which the gains of industry
are frittered away in evanescent, uncreative expenditures.
What matters is the ratio of production
to creation.</p>
<p>Here lies the justification of the modern architect.
Cut off though he is from the actual processes of
building, he nevertheless remains the sole surviving
craftsman who maintains the relation towards the
whole structure that the old handicraft workers used
to enjoy in connection with their particular job.
The architect can still leave his imprint, and even
in the severely utilitarian factory he can take the
simple forms of the engineer and turn them into a
superb structure like Messrs. Helmle and Corbett’s
Fletcher Building in New York. To the extent that
honest engineering is better than fake architecture,
genuine architecture is better than engineering: for
it strikes the same esthetic and humane chord that
painting and sculpture appeal to by themselves. The
freedom to depart from arbitrary and mechanical
precedent, the freedom to project new forms which
will more adequately meet his problem are essential
to the architect. Up to the present he has been<span class="pagenum">[224]</span>
able, for the most part, to exercise this freedom only
on traditional buildings, like churches and libraries
and auditoriums, which are outside the reaches of
the present commercial regime and have therefore
some prospect of durability.</p>
<p>But before the whole mass of contemporary building
will be ready to receive the imprint of the architect,
and before the handicrafts re-enter the modern
building to give the luster of permanence to its
decorations and fixtures, there will have to be a
pretty thoroughgoing reorientation in our economic
life. Whilst buildings are erected to increase site
values, whilst houses are produced in block to be
sold to the first wretch who must put a roof over
his family’s head, it is useless to dwell upon the
ministrations of art; and, unfortunately, too much
of our building today rests upon this basis and exhibits
all the infirmities of our present economic
structure.</p>
<p>From the aspect of our well-to-do suburbs and our
newly-planned industrial towns, from the beginnings
of a sound functional architecture in some of our
schools and factories, it is easy to see what the
architecture of our various regions might be if it
had the opportunity to work itself out in a coherent<span class="pagenum">[225]</span>
pattern. For the present, however, it is impossible
to say with any certainty whether our architects are
doomed to be extruded by mechanism, or whether
they will have the opportunity to restore to our
machine-system some of the freedom of an earlier
regime; and I have no desire to burden this discussion
with predictions and exhortations. But if the
conclusions we have reached are sound, it is only the
second possibility that holds out any promise to the
good life.</p>
<h3>VI</h3>
<p>So far we have considered the regional and
industrial bearing of architecture: it now remains
to examine briefly its relation to the community
itself.</p>
<p>In the building of our cities and villages the main
<em>mores</em> we have carried over have been those of the
pioneer. We have seen how the animus of the pioneer,
“mine and move,” is antagonistic to the settled
life out of which ordered industries and a great
architecture grow. We have seen also how this
animus was deepened in the nineteenth century by
the extraordinary temptation to profit by the increase
in land-increments which followed the growth<span class="pagenum">[226]</span>
of population, the result being, as Mr. Henry George
saw when he came back to the cities of the East from
a part of California that was still in the throes of
settlement—progress <em>and</em> poverty.</p>
<p>Now, to increase the population of a town and
to raise the nominal values in ground rents is almost
a moral imperative in our American communities.
That is why our zoning laws, which attempt to regulate
the use of land and provide against unfair competition
in obtaining the unearned increment, almost
universally leave a loophole through which the property
owners, by mutual consent, may transform the
character of the neighborhood for more intensive
uses and higher ground rents. All our city planning,
and more and more our architecture itself, is done
with reference to prospective changes in the value
of real estate. It is nothing to the real estate speculator
that the growth of a city destroys the very
purpose for which it may legitimately exist, as the
growth of Atlantic City into a suburb of Broadway
and Chestnut Street ruined its charm as a seaside
fishing village. Sufficient unto the day is the evil
he creates.</p>
<p>Most of the important changes that must be effected
in relation to industry and the land cannot<span class="pagenum">[227]</span>
be accomplished without departing from these dominant
<em>mores</em>—from the customs and laws and uneasy
standards of ethics which we carry over from the
days of our continental conquest. The pioneer inheritance
of the miner, coupled with the imperial
inheritance of the hunter-warrior, out for loot, lie
at the bottom of our present-day social structure;
and it is useless to expect any vital changes in the
milieu of architecture until the miner and the hunter
are subordinated to relatively more civilized types,
concerned with the culture of life, rather than with
its exploitation and destruction.</p>
<p>I am aware that the statement of the problem
in these elementary terms will seem a little crude and
unfamiliar in America where, in the midst of our
buzzing urban environment, we lose sight of the
underlying primitive reality, or—which is worse—speak
vaguely of the “cave-man” unleashed in modern
civilization. I do not deny that there are other
elements in our makeup and situation that play an
important part; but it is enough to bring forward
here the notion that our concern with physical
utilities and with commercial values is something
more than an abstract defect in our philosophy. On
the contrary, it seems to me to inhere in the dominant<span class="pagenum">[228]</span>
occupations of the country, and it is less to
be overcome by moralizing and exhortation, than to
be grown out of, by taking pains to provide for the
ascendancy and renewal of the more humane occupations.</p>
<p>Our communities have grown blindly, and, escaping
the natural limitations which curbed even the Roman
engineers, have not been controlled, on the other
hand, by any normative ideal. One step in the direction
of departing from our pioneer customs and
habits would be to consider what the nature of a
city is, and what functions it performs. The dominant,
abstract culture of the nineteenth century
was blithely unconcerned with these questions, but,
as I have already pointed out, the Puritans not
merely recognized their importance, but regulated
the plan and layout of the city accordingly. The
notion that there is anything arbitrary in imposing
a limitation upon the area and population of a city
is absurd: the limits have already been laid down
in the physical conditions of human nature, as Mr.
Frederic Harrison once wisely observed, in the fact
that men do not walk comfortably faster than three
miles an hour, nor can they spend on the physical
exertion of locomotion and exercise more than a<span class="pagenum">[229]</span>
few hours in every twenty-four. With respect to
the needs of recreation, home-life, and health, the
growth of a city to the point where the outlying
citizen must travel two hours a day in the subway
between his office and his place of work is unintelligent
and arbitrary.</p>
<p>A city, properly speaking, does not exist by the
accretion of houses, but by the association of human
beings. When the accretion of houses reaches such
a point of congestion or expansion that human association
becomes difficult, the place ceases to be a
city. The institutions that make up the city—schools,
clubs, libraries, gymnasia, theaters, churches,
and so forth—can be traced in one form or another
back to the primitive community: they function on
the basis of immediate intercourse, and they can serve
through their individual units only a limited number
of people. Should the population of a local community
be doubled, all its civic equipment must be
doubled too; otherwise the life that functions
through these institutions and opportunities will
lapse and disappear.</p>
<p>It is not my purpose to discuss in detail the various
devices by which our practice of endless growth
and unlimited increment may be limited. Once the<span class="pagenum">[230]</span>
necessary conversion in faith and morals has taken
place, the other things will come easily: for example,
the social appropriation of unearned land-increments,
and the exercise of the town-planner’s
art to limit the tendency of a community to straggle
beyond its boundaries.</p>
<p>While a great many other ideas and measures are
of prime importance for the good life of the community,
that which concerns its architectural expression
is the notion of the community as limited
in numbers, and in area; and as formed, not merely
by the agglomeration of people, but by their relation
to definite social and economic institutions.
To express these relations clearly, to embody them
in buildings and roads and gardens in which each
individual structure will be subordinated to the whole—this
is the end of community planning.</p>
<p>With the coherence and stability indicated by this
method of planning, architectural effect would not
lie in the virtuosity of the architect or in the peculiar
ornateness and originality of any particular building:
it would tend to be diffused, so that the humblest
shop would share in the triumph with the most
conspicuous public building. There are examples
of this order of comprehensive architectural design<span class="pagenum">[231]</span>
in hundreds of little villages and towns in pre-industrial
Europe—to say nothing of a good handful in
pre-industrial America—and community planning
would make it once more our daily practice. That
it can be done again the examples of Letchworth
and Welwyn in England, and numerous smaller gardened
cities created by municipal authorities in
England and other parts of Europe, bear evidence;
and where the precepts of Mr. Ebenezer Howard
have been to any degree followed, architecture has
been quick to benefit.</p>
<p>The difference between community planning and
the ordinary method of city-extension and suburb-building
has been very well put in a recent report
to the American Institute of Architects, by the Committee
on Community Planning. “Community planning,”
says the report, “does not ask by what desperate
means a city of 600,000 people can add
another 400,000 during the next generation, nor how
a city of seven millions may enlarge its effective borders
to include 29,000,000. It begins, rather, at the
other end, and it asks with Mr. Ebenezer Howard
how big must a city be to perform all of its social,
educational, and industrial functions. It attempts
to establish minima and maxima for different kinds<span class="pagenum">[232]</span>
of communities, depending upon their character and
function. If the established practices of industry,
commerce, and finance tend to produce monstrous
agglomerations which do not contribute to human
welfare or happiness, community planning must question
these established practices, since the values they
create have nothing to do with the essential welfare
of the community itself, and since the condition thus
created is inimical to the stable, architectural development
of the community.”</p>
<p>The normative idea of the garden-city and the
garden-village is the corrective for the flatulent and
inorganic conception of city-development that we
labor with, and under, today. So far from being a
strange importation from Europe, the garden-city is
nothing more or less than a sophisticated recovery
of a form that we once enjoyed on our Atlantic
seaboard, and lost through our sudden and almost
uncontrollable access of natural resources and people.
Here and there an enterprising and somewhat
benevolent industrial corporation has attempted to
carry out some of the principles of garden-city development;
and the United States Housing Corporation
and the Shipping Board had begun to build
many admirable communities, when the war brought<span class="pagenum">[233]</span>
this vast initiative to an end. These precedents are
better than nothing, it goes without saying, but there
will have to be a pretty thorough reorientation in
our economic and social life before the garden-city
will be anything more than a slick phrase, without
content or power.</p>
<p>Until our communities are ready to undertake the
sort of community planning that leads to garden-cities,
it will be empty eloquence to talk about the
future of American architecture. Sheltered as an
enjoyment for the prosperous minority, or used as a
skysign for the advertisement of business, architecture
will still await its full opportunity for creative
achievement.</p>
<p>The signs of promise are plenty, and if I have
dealt with the darker side of the picture and have occasionally
overemphasized the weaknesses and defects
of the American tradition, it is only because in our
present appreciation of what the American architect
has already given form to, we are likely to forget the
small area these achievements occupy. So far we
have achieved patches of good building; more than
once we have achieved the <i lang="fr">mot juste</i>, but we have
not learnt the more difficult art of consecutive discourse.
With respect to the architecture of the<span class="pagenum">[234]</span>
whole community, medieval Boston and medieval New
Amsterdam had more to boast than their magnificently
endowed successors. Just as Mr. Babbitt’s
great ancestor, Scadder, transformed a swamp into
a thriving metropolis by the simple method of calling
it New Eden, so do we tend to lighten our burdens
by calling them the “blessings of progress”;
but it does not avail. Our mechanical and metropolitan
civilization, with all its genuine advances,
has let certain essential human elements drop out
of its scheme; and until we recover these elements
our civilization will be at loose ends, and our architecture
will unerringly express this situation.</p>
<p>Home, meeting-place, and factory; polity, culture,
and art have still to be united and wrought together,
and this task is one of the fundamental tasks of our
civilization. Once that union is effected, the long
breach between art and life, which began with the
Renaissance, will be brought to an end. The magnitude
of our task might seem a little disheartening,
were it not for the fact that, “against or with our
will,” our civilization is perpetually being modified
and altered. If in less than a hundred years the
feudal civilization of Japan could adopt our modern
mechanical gear, there is nothing to prevent our<span class="pagenum">[235]</span>
own civilization from recovering once more its human
base—nothing, that is, except our own desires, aims,
habits, and ends. This is an ironic consolation, perhaps,
but the remedy it offers is real.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[237]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="ENVOI"> <i lang="fr">ENVOI</i></h2>
</div>
<p><em>The aristocracies of the world have never doubted
the supremacy of the home and garden and temple
over all the baser mechanisms of existence, and the
folk-civilizations out of which aristocracies have
so often risen have never strayed far from these
realities. In the Norse fables, the dwarfs are regarded
as queer monsters, because they are always
“busy people” who have no pride or joy except in
the work they perform and the mischief they cause.</em></p>
<p><em>The great heresy of the modern world is that it
ceased to worship the Lords of Life, who made the
rivers flow, caused the animals to mate, and brought
forth the yearly miracle of vegetation: it prostrated
itself, on the contrary, before the dwarfs, with their
mechanical ingenuity, and the giants, with their imbecile
power. Today our lives are perpetually menaced
by these “busy people”; we are surrounded by
their machines, and for worship, we turn their prayer
wheels of red-tape.</em></p>
<p><em>It will not always be so; that would be monstrous.<span class="pagenum">[238]</span>
Sooner or later we will learn to pick our way out of
the débris that the dwarfs, the gnomes, and the giants
have created; eventually, to use Henry Adams’
figure, the sacred mother will supplant the dynamo.
The prospects for our architecture are bound up
with a new orientation towards the things that are
symbolized in the home, the garden and the temple;
for architecture sums up the civilization it enshrines,
and the mass of our buildings can never be better
or worse than the institutions that have shaped them.</em></p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>
<div class="chapter">
<p><span class="pagenum">[241]</span></p>
<h2 class="nobreak" id="NOTES_ON_BOOKS">NOTES ON BOOKS</h2>
</div>
<h3>I<br/>
<span class="smcap">Historical Background</span></h3>
<p>The best introductions to the historic setting of
our architecture and civilization are the local guide-books
and histories. See, for example, Stokes’s excellent
and exhaustive Iconography of Manhattan,
and the Memorial History of Boston, edited by Justin
Winsor. Both are profusely illustrated. In the
wave of civic enthusiasm that swept over the country
in the ’nineties, many local descriptions and
histories were written. For the most part, they are
loose, rambling, credulous, and devoid of sociological
insight: but occasionally there is a nugget in the
matrix. Powell’s Historic Towns series covers broad
ground. As regional histories, Weeden’s Economic
and Social History of New England, and Mr. Samuel
Eliot Morison’s Maritime History of Massachusetts,
stand in a class by themselves: in them we
have the beginnings of what W. H. Riehl called a
“natural history” of the human community.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[242]</span></p>
<h3>II<br/>
<span class="smcap">Architectural History</span></h3>
<p>Ever since colonial architecture was reappreciated
after the Civil War, a large amount of material has
appeared on the early architecture of the colonies.
Before 1900 the greater part of this was uncritical.
Isham and Brown’s work on the early architecture of
Connecticut and Rhode Island made a new departure,
which Messrs. Cousins and Riley’s studies of the
architecture of Salem and Philadelphia have carried
on. Mr. Fiske Kimball’s compendious study of the
Domestic Architecture of the Colonies and the Early
Republic brings together a large amount of authenticated
data. Articles and illustrations dealing with
particular aspects of our pre-industrial architecture,
or with particular regions—like the Lebanon Valley
in Pennsylvania—are scattered through the
architectural periodicals. Beyond the early republican
period, our architectural histories come to an
end. Works like John Bullock’s The American Cottage
Builder, New York: 1854, occur in almost every
old library and are full of interesting data. To fill
the gap in later years we must have recourse to a
comprehensive German treatise, Das Amerikanische<span class="pagenum">[243]</span>
Haus, by F. R. Vogel, Berlin: 1910. This may be
supplemented by Homes in City and Country, by
Russell Sturgis, J. W. Root and others, New York:
1893.</p>
<h3>III<br/>
<span class="smcap">Biographical Studies</span></h3>
<p>Where formal description leaves off, the biographies
of our principal architects enter. The following
books traverse in order the entire period from
the Revolution to the present generation.</p>
<p>Samuel McIntire: His Life and Work. F. Cousins
and P. M. Riley, Boston: 1916.</p>
<p>The Life and Letters of Charles Bulfinch. Ellen
Susan Bulfinch, New York: 1896.</p>
<p>The Journal of Latrobe. Benjamin Henry Latrobe,
New York: 1905.</p>
<p>Henry Hobson Richardson. Mrs. Schuyler Van
Rensselaer, Boston: 1888.</p>
<p>Charles Follen McKim. A. H. Granger, Boston:
1913.</p>
<p>Daniel H. Burnham. Charles Moore, New York:
1921.</p>
<p>The Autobiography of an Idea. Louis H. Sullivan,
New York: 1924.</p>
<p><span class="pagenum">[244]</span></p>
<h3>IV<br/>
<span class="smcap">Contemporary Work</span></h3>
<p>Portfolios of work by contemporary architects
are so numerous that to single out any would be
invidious. The files of the Architectural Record,
the American Architect, House and Garden, and
Arts and Decorations—to mention only the more
available periodicals—should be consulted particularly
for illustrations.</p>
<h3>V<br/>
<span class="smcap">Esthetics</span></h3>
<p>As an introduction to architecture in general the
formal textbooks are occasionally useful. Let me
commend particularly, however, Viollet-le-Duc’s The
Habitations of Man in all Ages. The archæology
and ethnology of this work are, it goes without saying,
outmoded: but for all that it has a permanent
interest, and it is high time that someone took up
Viollet-le-Duc’s theme and redeveloped it in the
light of contemporary research. While I am restoring
a classic, let me add another: Ruskin’s
The Seven Lamps of Architecture. Ruskin is disregarded<span class="pagenum">[245]</span>
nowadays, as he was in his own generation,
by people who have not yet caught up with
him. His insight and unflinching intelligence are
both needed, however, and it is no longer necessary
to warn the student against his quirks and solecisms.
Ruskin wrote the apology for modernism in art when
he said: “There would be hope if we could change
palsy for puerility,” and he anticipated modern
decoration when he said: “I believe the only manner
of rich ornament that is open to us is geometrical
color mosaic, and that much might result from
strenuously taking up that mode of design.” For
that matter, Ruskin even predicted the architectural
use of steel frames. The Seven Lamps of Architecture
closes on a prophetic word which means far more
to us today than to Ruskin’s contemporaries. “I
could smile,” he said, “when I hear the hopeful exultation
of many, at the new reach of worldly science
and vigor of worldly effort; as if we were again at
the beginning of new days. There is thunder on the
horizon, as well as dawn.” We who have seen the
lightning strike may well reread these words....</p>
<p>As for modern books on architecture and esthetics,
let me recommend a handful. Among them note
W. R. Lethaby’s Form in Civilization. In sharp<span class="pagenum">[246]</span>
contrast to Professor Lethaby is Geoffrey Scott’s
The Architecture of Humanism, Boston: 1914. I
do not accept Mr. Scott’s main position; but there
is something to be said for it, and he says it well.
Both points of view are embraced in the distinction
Mr. Claude Bragdon makes between the Organic and
the Arranged, in one of Six Lectures on Architecture.
From a limited field, Rhys Carpenter’s
Esthetic Basis of Greek Art reaches conclusions
which illuminate almost every province of esthetics.
There is an able exposition of the absolutist, mechanical
point of view in Vers Une Architecture, by
the architect whose pen-name is “Le Corbusier-Saugnier.”
In Speculations, Mr. T. E. Hulme presents
an interesting philosophic apology for mechanism.</p>
<h3>VI<br/>
<span class="smcap">Sociology</span></h3>
<p>For the civic and sociological background of this
study, consult Professor Patrick Geddes’s Cities
in Evolution, London: 1915, likewise his Principles
of Sociology in Relation to Economics. The latter
can be obtained through Le Play House, 65 Belgrave
Road, London, S. W. 1. The chapter on Westminster,<span class="pagenum">[247]</span>
by Mr. Victor Branford, in Our Social Inheritance,
London: 1919, is a unique introduction to
the direct study of social institutions and their
architectural forms. The other volumes in The Making
of the Future series, edited by Messrs. Geddes
and Branford, should also have an important place
on the student’s shelf.</p>
<p>Light on our more immediate problems will be
found in the files of the Journal of the American
Institute of Architects. Note particularly Mr. F.
L. Ackermann’s article on Craftsmen—Machines—Speed—Credit,
June, 1923, and Mr. Benton Mackaye’s
article on the proposed Appalachian Trail.
See, also, the Power number of the Survey Graphic.
The report of the Committee on Community Planning
of the American Institute of Architects (1924)
should be read in connection with the last chapter:
it treats in detail the difficulties that the architect
confronts under our present economic and social
order. See, likewise, Mr. Ebenezer Howard’s
classic Garden Cities of Tomorrow.</p>